Overview
========

Introduction
------------

This document serves to introduce users to the ComputeMux compiler pipeline.
The reference compiler pipeline performs several key transformations over
several phases that can be difficult to understand for new users.

The pipeline is constructed and run in ``compiler::BaseModule::finalize``
(overridable but provided by default) which defers to the pure virtual
``compiler::BaseModule::getLateTargetPasses`` which **must** be implemented by
a target.

The pipeline described here is thus the reference model used by all in-tree
ComputeMux targets, used as a suggestion of how to construct a basic target
pipeline. Everything is ultimately customizable by the target.

.. contents:: Contents
   :local:

Objective & Execution Model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The reference compiler pipeline's objective is to compile incoming
LLVM IR modules containing one or more kernel functions to object code ready
for execution when invoked by the host-side runtime. The assumptions placed on
the input and output kernels is as follows:

1. The original kernel is assumed to adhere to an implicit **SIMT** execution
   model; it runs once per each *work-item* in an **NDRange**.
2. The final compiled kernel is assumed to be invoked from the host-side
   runtime once per *work-group* in the **NDRange**.

  * This execution model is referenced elsewhere in documentation as a
    *work-item per thread* or *core per work-item* scheduling model.

The following diagram provides an overview of the main phases of the reference
ComputeMux compiler pipeline in terms of the underlying and assumed kernel
execution model.

The inner-most function is the original input kernel, which is *wrapped* by new
functions in successive phases, until it is ready in a form to be executed by
the ComputeMux driver.

.. graphviz::
  :name: ComputeMux Compiler Execution Model Overview
  :caption: Overview of the passes involved in handling the kernel execution model

  digraph ExecutionModel {
    ranksep=0.75
    compound = true;
    graph [colorscheme=ylgnbu9];

    graph [fontname = "Courier New"];
    node [fontname = "Courier New"];
    edge [fontname = "Courier New"];

    Driver [
      shape = box;
      label = "Driver entry point";
    ];
    BarrierWrapper [
      shape = box;
      label = "@foo.mux-barrier-wrapper(/* kernel params */)";
    ];
    OrigKernel [
      shape = box;
      label = "@foo(/* kernel params */)";
    ];

    Link1 [
      shape = octagon;
      label = "for (wg : nd_range)";
    ]
    Link2 [
      shape = octagon;
      label = "for (wi : wg)";
    ]

    subgraph cluster_driver {
      bgcolor=1
      label="ComputeMux Driver";
      labeljust=r

      Driver;
      Link1;

      subgraph cluster_barrier_wrapper {
        bgcolor=3
        label="HandleBarriersPass";
        labeljust=r

        BarrierWrapper;
        Link2;

        subgraph cluster_foo {
          bgcolor=5
          label="Original kernel";

          OrigKernel;
        }
      }
    }

    Driver -> Link1
    Link1 -> BarrierWrapper
    BarrierWrapper -> Link2
    Link2 -> OrigKernel [lhead=cluster_foo]
  }

The :ref:`HandleBarriersPass <modules/compiler/utils:HandleBarriersPass>` is
the key pass which makes some of the implicit parallelism explicit. By
introducing *work-item loops* around each kernel function, the new kernel entry
point now runs on every work-group in an **NDRange**.

.. note::

  Targets adhering to a *work-item per thread* or *core per work-item*
  scheduling model will likely wish to omit the ``HandleBarriersPass``.

Host
****

As mentioned, the above documents the *reference* compiler pipeline. The in-tree
:doc:`/modules/host` target uses a different model, where the driver splits up
the **NDRange** into multi-dimensional *slices* and calls the
compiler-generated code for each slice. Each work-group in the slice is then
traversed using multi-dimensional work-group loops generated by the
:ref:`AddEntryHookPass <addentryhookpass>`:

.. graphviz::
  :name: ComputeMux Compiler Host Execution Model Overview
  :caption: Overview of the host target's excecution model

  digraph ExecutionModel {
    ranksep=0.75
    compound = true;
    graph [colorscheme=ylgnbu9];

    graph [fontname = "Courier New"];
    node [fontname = "Courier New"];
    edge [fontname = "Courier New"];

    Driver [
      shape = box;
      label = "Driver entry point";
    ];
    AddEntryHookPass [
      shape = box;
      label = "@foo.host-entry-hook(/* ABI params */)";
    ];
    BarrierWrapper [
      shape = box;
      label = "@foo.mux-barrier-wrapper(/* kernel params */)";
    ];
    OrigKernel [
      shape = box;
      label = "@foo(/* kernel params */)";
    ];

    Link1 [
      shape = octagon;
      label = "for (slice : nd_range)";
    ]
    Link2 [
      shape = octagon;
      label = "for (wg : slice)";
    ]
    Link3 [
      shape = octagon;
      label = "for (wi : wg)";
    ]

    subgraph cluster_driver {
      bgcolor=1
      label="ComputeMux Driver";
      labeljust=r

      Driver;
      Link1;

      subgraph cluster_entry_hook {
        bgcolor=2
        label="AddEntryHookPass";
        labeljust=r

        AddEntryHookPass;
        Link2;

        subgraph cluster_barrier_wrapper {
          bgcolor=3
          label="HandleBarriersPass";
          labeljust=r

          BarrierWrapper;
          Link3;

          subgraph cluster_foo {
            bgcolor=5
            label="Original kernel";

            OrigKernel;
          }
        }
      }
    }

    Driver -> Link1
    Link1 -> AddEntryHookPass
    AddEntryHookPass -> Link2
    Link2 -> BarrierWrapper
    BarrierWrapper -> Link3
    Link3 -> OrigKernel [lhead=cluster_foo]
  }

Compiler Pipeline Overview
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With the overall execution model established, we can start to dive deeper into
the key phases of the compilation pipeline.

.. graphviz::
  :name: ComputeMux Compiler Overview
  :caption: Overview of compilation pipeline

  digraph {
    ranksep=0.75
    compound = true;
    graph [colorscheme=ylgnbu9];

    graph [fontname = "Courier New"];
    node [fontname = "Courier New"];
    edge [fontname = "Courier New"];

    N1 [
      shape = box
      style=filled
      fillcolor="#f5f2ca"
      label = "Input IR"
    ]

    N2 [
      shape = box
      style=filled
      fillcolor="#dfeabf"
      label = "Adding Metadata/Attributes"
    ]

    N3 [
      shape = box
      style=filled
      fillcolor="#c8e2b7"
      label = "Vecz"
    ]

    N4 [
      shape = box
      style=filled
      fillcolor="#afdab2"
      label = "Linking Builtins"
    ]

    N5 [
      shape = box
      style=filled
      fillcolor="#96d2b0"
      label = "Work-item Scheduling & Barriers"
    ]

    N6 [
      shape = box
      style=filled
      fillcolor="#7dc9b1"
      label = "Adding Scheduling Parameters"
    ]

    N7 [
      shape = box
      style=filled
      fillcolor="#63c0b5"
      label = "Defining mux builtins"
    ]

    N8 [
      shape = box
      style=filled
      fillcolor="#4bb5b9"
      label = "Kernel Wrapping"
    ]

    N9 [
      shape = box
      style=filled
      fillcolor="#36aabd"
      label = "Binary Object Creation"
    ]
    // #289ec1
    N1 -> N2 -> N3 -> N4 -> N5 -> N6 -> N7 -> N8 -> N9
    N2 -> N4
  }


.. _pipeline_overview:

Input IR
********

The program begins as an LLVM module, either generated by a compiler frontend
or deserialized from another intermediate form such as `SPIRV`_ or `SPIR`_.
Kernels in the module are assumed to obey a **SIMT** programming model, as
described earlier in `Objective & Execution Model`_.

Simple fix-up passes take place at this stage: the IR is massaged to conform to
specifications or to fix known deficiencies in earlier representations.

Adding Metadata/Attributes
**************************

ComputeMux IR metadata and attributes are attached to kernels. This information
is used by following passes to identify certain aspects of kernels which are
not otherwise attainable or representable in LLVM IR.

The :ref:`TransferKernelMetadataPass and EncodeKernelMetadataPass
<encodekernelmetadatapass>` are responsible for adding this information.

See the :doc:`/specifications/mux-compiler-spec` for details about specific
:ref:`metadata <specifications/mux-compiler-spec:Metadata>` and
:ref:`attributes <specifications/mux-compiler-spec:Function Attributes>`.

Early transformation passes and optimizations take place at this stage. Of note
is LLVM's `SLP vectorizer`_.

.. note::

  This takes place in ``BaseModule::finalize`` before calling
  ``BaseModule::getLateTargetPasses`` so metadata and attributes can be assumed
  to be present as an input to that method.

Vectorization
*************

Early Vectorization Passes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These passes are activated when the `VectorizeSLP` and `VectorizeLoop` bits are
set in `clang::CodeGenOptions` (corresponding to the
`-cl-vec={none|loop|slp|all}` command line options). These options activate
sequences of standard LLVM passes that attempt to vectorize the kernel for a
single work item. The vectorization passes used are Loop Vectorization, SLP
Vectorization, and Load/Store Vectorization. Some basic simplification passes
are also applied (Loop Rotation, Instruction Combine, CFG Simplification and
Dead Code Removal). Loop Rotation was found necessary for Loop Vectorization to
work as expected. Loop Rotation can also generate redundant code in the case
that the number of iterations is known at compile time to be a multiple of the
vector width, and the CFG Simplification is able to clean it up. Load/Store
vectorization is applied if either of Loop or SLP options are selected.

Whole Function Vectorization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The :doc:`/modules/vecz` whole-function vectorizer is optionally run.

Note that VECZ may perform its own scalarization, depending on the options
passed to it, potentially undoing the work of any of the Early Vectorization
Passes, although it is able to preserve or even widen pre-existing vector
operations in many cases.

Linking Builtins
****************

:doc:`/modules/builtins/abacus` builtins are linked into the module by the
:ref:`LinkBuiltinsPass <modules/compiler/utils:LinkBuiltinsPass>`.

This is historically done after whole-function vectorization, with the
vectorizer generating scaled up vector forms of known builtins (e.g.,
``round(float2) -> x4 -> round(float8)``).

.. note::

   It is also possible to link *most* builtins before vectorization, where the
   vectorizer will rely on inlining of any used builtins, and vectorize
   accordingly. Some builtins must still be linked after vectorization,
   however. See the pass's documentation for more information.

Work-item Scheduling & Barriers
*******************************

The work-item loops are added to each kernel by the :ref:`HandleBarriersPass
<modules/compiler/utils:HandleBarriersPass>`.

The kernel execution model changes at this stage to replace some of the implicit
parallelism with explicit looping, as described earlier in `Objective &
Execution Model`_.

`Barrier Scheduling`_ takes place at this stage, as well as `Vectorization
Scheduling`_ if the vectorizer was run.

Adding Scheduling Parameters
****************************

Scheduling parameters are added to builtin functions that need them. These
extra parameters are used by software implementations of mux work-item builtins
to provide extra data, used when lowering in a later phase.

The :ref:`AddSchedulingParametersPass
<modules/compiler/utils:AddSchedulingParametersPass>` is responsible for this
transformation.

A concrete example of this is the OpenCL ``get_global_id(uint)`` builtin.
These are defined (by default) as calling the ComputeMux equivalent
``__mux_get_global_id``. This function body will have been materialised when
linking builtins earlier.

While some hardware may have all of the necessary features for implementing
this builtin, many architectures don't. Thus the software implementation
needs to source extra data from somewhere external to the function. This is
the role that scheduling parameters fill.

.. note::

  The ``BuiltinInfo`` analysis controls which scheduling parameters are added.
  Targets may override ``BuiltinInfo`` to change their scheduling parameters
  whilst making use of this pass. See the tutorial on
  :doc:`/tutorials/custom-lowering-work-item-builtins` on how this may be
  accomplished.

Pseudo C code:

.. code:: c

  void foo() {
    size_t id = __mux_get_global_id(0);
  }

  size_t __mux_get_global_id(uint);

  // The AddSchedulingParametersPass produces the following
  // scheduling structures:
  struct MuxWorkItemInfo { size_t local_ids[3]; ... };
  struct MuxWorkGroupInfo { size_t group_ids[3]; ... };

  // And this wrapper function
  void foo.mux-sched-wrapper(MuxWorkItemInfo *wi, MuxWorkGroupInfo *wg) {
    size_t id = __mux_get_global_id(0, wi, wg);
  }

  // And a new version of __mux_get_global_id with scheduling parameters
  size_t __mux_get_global_id(uint, MuxWorkItemInfo *wi, MuxWorkGroupInfo *wg);

A combination of the ComputeMux driver as well as outer loops are responsible
for filling in all of the scheduling parameter data. For example:

1. The ``HandleBarriersPass`` sets the local ID at each loop level.

2. The ComputeMux driver externally sets up the work-group information such as
   the work-group IDs and sizes.

Defining mux Builtins
*********************

The bodies of mux builtin function declarations are provided. They may use the
extra information passed through parameters added by the
``AddSchedulingParametersPass`` in a previous phase.

The :ref:`DefineMuxBuiltinsPass <modules/compiler/utils:DefineMuxBuiltinsPass>`
performs this transformation.

Some builtins may rely on others to complete their function. These dependencies
are handled transitively.

.. note::

  The ``BuiltinInfo`` analysis controls how mux builtins are defined. Targets
  may override ``BuiltinInfo`` to change how specific builtins are defined
  whilst making use of this pass. See the tutorial on
  :doc:`/tutorials/custom-lowering-work-item-builtins` on how this may be
  accomplished.

Pseudo C code:

.. code:: c

  struct MuxWorkItemInfo { size_t[3] local_ids; ... };
  struct MuxWorkGroupInfo { size_t[3] group_ids; ... };

  // And this wrapper function
  void foo.mux-sched-wrapper(MuxWorkItemInfo *wi, MuxWorkGroupInfo *wg) {
    size_t id = __mux_get_global_id(0, wi, wg);
  }

  // The DefineMuxBuiltinsPass provides the definition
  // of __mux_get_global_id:
  size_t __mux_get_global_id(uint i, MuxWorkItemInfo *wi, MuxWorkGroupInfo *wg) {
    return (__mux_get_group_id(i, wi, wg) * __mux_get_local_size(i, wi, wg)) +
           __mux_get_local_id(i, wi, wg) + __mux_get_global_offset(i, wi, wg);
  }

  // And thus the definition of __mux_get_group_id...
  size_t __mux_get_group_id(uint i, MuxWorkItemInfo *wi, MuxWorkGroupInfo *wg) {
    return i >= 3 ? 0 : wg->group_ids[i];
  }

  // and __mux_get_local_id, etc
  size_t __mux_get_local_id(uint i, MuxWorkItemInfo *wi, MuxWorkGroupInfo *wg) {
    return i >= 3 ? 0 : wi->local_ids[i];
  }

Kernel Wrapping
***************

kernel's ABI is finalized, ready for it being called by the ComputeMux driver.

The :ref:`AddKernelWrapperPass <modules/compiler/utils:AddKernelWrapperPass>`
performs this transformation.

Kernel parameters are packed together into an auto-generated ``struct`` type. A
pointer to this structure is passed as the first parameter to the new kernel.

Scheduling parameters such as the ``work-group info`` are also preserved and
passed to this new kernel.

Scheduling parameters such as the ``work-item info`` that do not constitute the
kernel ABI are initialized by the wrapper, before being passed to the wrapped
kernel.

.. note::

  The ``BuiltinInfo`` analysis controls scheduling parameters and how they
  interact with the kernel ABI. Targets may override ``BuiltinInfo`` to change
  how specific builtins are defined whilst making use of this pass. See the
  tutorial on :doc:`/tutorials/custom-lowering-work-item-builtins` on how this
  may be accomplished.

Pseudo C code:

.. code:: c

  struct MuxWorkItemInfo { ... };
  struct MuxWorkGroupInfo { ... };

  void foo(global int *a, double f, MuxWorkItemInfo *, MuxWorkGroupInfo *);

  // AddKernelWrapperPass produces the following packed-argument struct:
  struct MuxPackedArgs.foo { global int *a; double f; };

  // AddKernelWrapperPass produces the following wrapper:
  void foo.mux-kernel-wrapper(MuxPackedArgs.foo *args, MuxWorkGroupInfo *wg) {
    // Note - the default behaviour is to stack-allocate MuxWorkItemInfo,
    // leaving all fields uninitialized. The previous compiler passes always
    // 'set' values before they 'get' them. Targets can customize this
    // behaviour: see the tutoral linked above.
    MuxWorkItemInfo wi;
    global int *a = args->a;
    double f = args->f;
    return foo(a, f, &wi, wg);
  }

Binary Object Creation
**********************

Any final passes are run now before the module is passed off to generate an
object file. For ahead-of-time targets, this may involve calling on LLVM to
generate an ELF file. For just-in-time targets, nothing further may be done at
this stage - instead deferring compilation until execution time.

When presented with a binary object, the host runtime needs to identify the
kernel to call. A common approach used by ComputeMux compiler targets is to run
the :ref:`AddMetadataPass <modules/compiler/utils:addmetadatapass<analysisty,
handlerty>>` which helps to encode kernel metadata into the final ELF file. This can then be decoded

.. _SPIR: https://www.khronos.org/registry/spir
.. _SPIRV: https://www.khronos.org/registry/spir-v/
.. _SLP vectorizer: https://www.llvm.org/docs/Vectorizers.html#the-slp-vectorizer

Barrier Scheduling
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The fact that the :ref:`HandleBarriersPass
<modules/compiler/utils:HandleBarriersPass>` handles both barriers and
work-item loops can be confusing to newcomers. These two concepts are in fact
linked. Taking the kernel code below, this section will show how the
``HandleBarriersPass`` lays out and schedules a kernel's work-item loops in the
face of barriers.

.. code:: c

   kernel void foo(global int *a, global int *b) {
     // pre barrier code - foo.mux-barrier-region.0()
     size_t id = get_global_id(0);
     a[id] += 4;
     // barrier
     barrier(CLK_GLOBAL_MEM_FENCE);
     // post barrier code - foo.mux-barrier-region.1()
     b[id] += 4;
   }

The kernel has one global barrier, and one statement on either side of it. The
``HandleBarriersPass`` conceptually breaks down the kernel into *barrier
regions*, which constitute the code following the control-flow between all
barriers in the kernel. The example above has two regions: the first contains
the call to ``get_global_id`` and the read/update/write of global memory
pointed to by ``a``; the second contains the read/update/write of global memory
pointed to by ``b``.

To correctly observe the barrier's semantics, all work-items in the work-group
need to execute the first barrier region before beginning the second. Thus the
``HandleBarriersPass`` produces two sets of work-item loops to schedule this
kernel:

.. graphviz::
  :name: ComputeMux Barrier Layout
  :caption: How a simple barrier is laid out by HandleBarriersPass

  digraph ExecutionModel {
    ranksep=0.75
    compound = true;
    graph [colorscheme=ylgnbu9];

    graph [fontname = "Courier New"];
    node [fontname = "Courier New"];
    edge [fontname = "Courier New"];

    BarrierWrapper [
      shape = box;
      label = "@foo.mux-barrier-wrapper()";
    ];

    OrigKernel0 [
      shape = box;
      label = "@foo.mux-barrier-region.0()\l  a[id] += 4;\l";
    ];
    OrigKernel1 [
      shape = box;
      label = "@foo.mux-barrier-region.1()\l  b[id] += 4;\l";
    ];
    Fence [
      shape = box;
      label = "fence";
    ]


    Link1 [
      shape = octagon;
      label = "for (wi : wg)";
    ]
    Link2 [
      shape = octagon;
      label = "for (wi : wg)";
    ]

    subgraph cluster_barrier_wrapper {
      bgcolor=3
      label="HandleBarriersPass";
      labeljust=r

      BarrierWrapper
      Link1

      subgraph cluster_foo {
        bgcolor=5
        label="";

        OrigKernel0;
      }

      Fence

      Link2

      subgraph cluster_foo2 {
        bgcolor=5
        label="";

        OrigKernel1;
      }
    }

    BarrierWrapper -> Link1
    Link1 -> OrigKernel0 [dir=both]
    OrigKernel0 -> Fence
    Fence -> Link2
    Link2 -> OrigKernel1 [dir=both]
  }

Live Variables
**************

Note also that ``id`` is a *live variable* whose lifetime traverses the
barrier. The ``HandleBarriersPass`` creates a structure of live variables which
are passed between the successive barrier regions, containing data that needs
to be live in future regions.

In this case, however, calls to certain builtins like ``get_global_id`` are
treated specially and are materialized anew in each barrier region where they
are used.

Vectorization Scheduling
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The :ref:`HandleBarriersPass <modules/compiler/utils:HandleBarriersPass>` is
responsible for laying out kernels which have been vectorized by the
:doc:`/modules/vecz` whole-function vectorizer.

The vectorizer creates multiple versions of the original kernel. Vectorized
kernels on their own are generally unable to fulfill work-group scheduling
requirements, as they operate only on a number of work-items equal to a
multiple of the vectorization factor. As such, for the general case, several
kernels must be combined to cover all work-items in the work-group; the
``HandleBarriersPass`` is responsible for this.

.. note::
  The following diagram uses a vectorization width of 4.

  For brevity, the diagram below only details in inner-most work-item loops.
  Most kernels will in reality have 2 outer levels of loops over the full *Y*
  and *Z* work-group dimensions.

.. graphviz::
  :name: ComputeMux Vectorized Barrier Layout
  :caption: How a vectorized kernel is laid out by HandleBarriersPass

  digraph ExecutionModel {
    ranksep=0.75
    compound = true;
    graph [colorscheme=ylgnbu9];

    graph [fontname = "Courier New"];
    node [fontname = "Courier New"];
    edge [fontname = "Courier New"];

    BarrierWrapper [
      shape = box;
      label = "@foo.mux-barrier-wrapper()";
    ];

    OrigKernel0 [
      shape = box;
      label = "@__vecz_v4_foo()";
    ];
    OrigKernel1 [
      shape = box;
      label = "@foo()";
    ];
    ScalarPH [
      shape = box;
      label = "<scalar check>";
    ];
    Exit [
      shape = box;
      label = "return";
    ];

    Link1 [
      shape = box;
      label = "unsigned i = 0;\lunsigned wg_size = get_local_size(0);\lunsigned peel = wg_size % 4;\l";
    ]
    VectorPH [
      shape = box;
      label = "for (unsigned e = wg_size - peel; i < e; i += 4)";
    ]
    Link2 [
      shape = box;
      label = "for (; i < wg_size; i++)";
    ]

    subgraph cluster_barrier_wrapper {
      bgcolor=3
      label="HandleBarriersPass";
      labeljust=r

      BarrierWrapper
      Link1
      VectorPH

      subgraph cluster_foo {
        bgcolor=5
        label="";

        OrigKernel0;
      }

      ScalarPH

      Link2

      subgraph cluster_foo2 {
        bgcolor=5
        label="";

        OrigKernel1;
      }

      Exit
    }

    BarrierWrapper -> Link1
    Link1 -> VectorPH [label="if (wg_size != peel)"]
    Link1 -> ScalarPH [label="if (wg_size == peel)"]
    VectorPH -> OrigKernel0 [dir=both]
    OrigKernel0 -> ScalarPH
    ScalarPH -> Link2 [label="if (peel)"]
    Link2 -> OrigKernel1 [dir=both]
    ScalarPH -> Exit [label="if (!peel)"]
    OrigKernel1 -> Exit
  }

In the above example, the vectorized kernel is called to execute as many
work-items as possible, up to the largest multiple of the vectorization less
than or equal to the work-group size.

In the case that there are work-items remaining (i.e., if the work-group size
is not a multiple of 4) then the original scalar kernel is called on the up to
3 remaining work-items. These remaining work-items are typically called the
'peel' iterations by ComputeMux.

Note that other vectorized kernel layouts are possible. See the documentation
for the :ref:`HandleBarriersPass <modules/compiler/utils:HandleBarriersPass>`
to find out other possibilities.
