sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture.asciidoc, before:

= sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}


== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2022-2023 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.


== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues


== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 5 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.


== Status

This is a proposed extension specification, intended to gather community
feedback.  Interfaces defined in this specification may not be implemented yet
or may be in a preliminary state.  The specification itself may also change in
incompatible ways before it is finalized.  *Shipping software products should
not rely on APIs defined in this specification.*

[comment]
--
_Add the following paragraph when this specification becomes "experimental"._

There are important limitations with the DPC++ implementation of this
experimental extension.  In particular, this extension may only be used when
the application is compiled in AOT mode.  See the section below titled
"Limitations with the experimental version" for a full description of the
limitations.
--


== Overview

This extension provides a way for device code to query the device architecture
on which it is running.  This is similar to the
link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_device_if.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_device_if]
extension except the comparison is for the device's architecture not the
device's aspects.  In some cases, low-level application code can use special
features or do specific optimizations depending on the device architecture, and
this extension enables such applications.


== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_DEVICE_ARCHITECTURE` to one of the values defined in the
table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to
determine if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test
the macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the
implementation supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|Initial version of this extension.

|2
|NVIDIA and AMD architectures are added.
|===

=== New enumeration of architectures

This extension adds a new enumeration of the architectures that can be tested.

```
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

enum class architecture : /* unspecified */ {
  x86_64,
  intel_gpu_bdw,
  intel_gpu_skl,
  intel_gpu_kbl,
  intel_gpu_cfl,
  intel_gpu_apl,
  intel_gpu_glk,
  intel_gpu_whl,
  intel_gpu_aml,
  intel_gpu_cml,
  intel_gpu_icllp,
  intel_gpu_ehl,
  intel_gpu_tgllp,
  intel_gpu_rkl,
  intel_gpu_adl_s,
  intel_gpu_rpl_s,
  intel_gpu_adl_p,
  intel_gpu_adl_n,
  intel_gpu_dg1,
  intel_gpu_acm_g10,
  intel_gpu_acm_g11,
  intel_gpu_acm_g12,
  intel_gpu_pvc,

  nvidia_gpu_sm_50,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_52,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_53,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_60,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_61,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_62,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_70,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_72,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_75,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_80,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_86,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_87,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_89,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_90,

  amd_gpu_gfx700,
  amd_gpu_gfx701,
  amd_gpu_gfx702,
  amd_gpu_gfx801,
  amd_gpu_gfx802,
  amd_gpu_gfx803,
  amd_gpu_gfx805,
  amd_gpu_gfx810,
  amd_gpu_gfx900,
  amd_gpu_gfx902,
  amd_gpu_gfx904,
  amd_gpu_gfx906,
  amd_gpu_gfx908,
  amd_gpu_gfx90a,
  amd_gpu_gfx1010,
  amd_gpu_gfx1011,
  amd_gpu_gfx1012,
  amd_gpu_gfx1013,
  amd_gpu_gfx1030,
  amd_gpu_gfx1031,
  amd_gpu_gfx1032,

  intel_gpu_8_0_0 = intel_gpu_bdw,
  intel_gpu_9_0_9 = intel_gpu_skl,
  intel_gpu_9_1_9 = intel_gpu_kbl
  intel_gpu_9_2_9 = intel_gpu_cfl,
  intel_gpu_9_3_0 = intel_gpu_apl,
  intel_gpu_9_4_0 = intel_gpu_glk,
  intel_gpu_9_5_0 = intel_gpu_whl,
  intel_gpu_9_6_0 = intel_gpu_aml,
  intel_gpu_9_7_0 = intel_gpu_cml,
  intel_gpu_11_0_0 = intel_gpu_icllp,
  intel_gpu_11_2_0 = intel_gpu_ehl,
  intel_gpu_12_0_0 = intel_gpu_tgllp,
  intel_gpu_12_10_0 = intel_gpu_dg1 
};

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
```

The following table tells which version of this extension first included each
of these enumerators, and it provides a brief description of their meanings.

[%header,cols="5,1,5"]
|===
|Enumerator name
|Added in version
|Description

|`x86_64`
|1
|Any CPU device with the x86_64 instruction set.

|`intel_gpu_bdw`
|1
|Broadwell Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_skl`
|1
|Broadwell Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_kbl`
|1
|Kaby Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_cfl`
|1
|Coffee Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_apl`
|1
|Apollo Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_glk`
|1
|Gemini Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_whl`
|1
|Whiskey Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_aml`
|1
|Amber Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_cml`
|1
|Comet Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_icllp`
|1
|Ice Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_ehl`
|1
|Elkhart Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_tgllp`
|1
|Tiger Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_rkl`
|1
|Rocket Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_adl_s`
|1
|Alder Lake S Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_rpl_s`
|1
|Raptor Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_adl_p`
|1
|Alder Lake P Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_adl_n`
|1
|Alder Lake N Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_dg1`
|1
|DG1 Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_acm_g10`
|1
|Alchemist G10 Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_acm_g11`
|1
|Alchemist G11 Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_acm_g12`
|1
|Alchemist G12 Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_pvc`
|1
|Ponte Vecchio Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_8_0_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_bdw`.

|`intel_gpu_9_0_9`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_skl`.

|`intel_gpu_9_1_9`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_kbl`.

|`intel_gpu_9_2_9`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_cfl`.

|`intel_gpu_9_3_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_apl`.

|`intel_gpu_9_4_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_glk`.

|`intel_gpu_9_5_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_whl`.

|`intel_gpu_9_6_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_aml`.

|`intel_gpu_9_7_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_cml`.

|`intel_gpu_11_0_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_icllp`.

|`intel_gpu_11_2_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_ehl`.

|`intel_gpu_12_0_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_tgllp`.

|`intel_gpu_12_10_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_dg1`.

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_50`
|2
|NVIDIA Maxwell architecture (compute capability 5.0).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_52`
|2
|NVIDIA Maxwell architecture (compute capability 5.2).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_53`
|2
|NVIDIA Maxwell architecture (compute capability 5.3).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_60`
|2
|NVIDIA Pascal architecture (compute capability 6.0).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_61`
|2
|NVIDIA Pascal architecture (compute capability 6.1).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_62`
|2
|NVIDIA Pascal architecture (compute capability 6.2).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_70`
|2
|NVIDIA Volta architecture (compute capability 7.0).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_72`
|2
|NVIDIA Volta architecture (compute capability 7.2).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_75`
|2
|NVIDIA Turing architecture (compute capability 7.5).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_80`
|2
|NVIDIA Ampere architecture (compute capability 8.0).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_86`
|2
|NVIDIA Ampere architecture (compute capability 8.6).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_87`
|2
|Jetson/Drive AGX Orin architecture.

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_89`
|2
|NVIDIA Ada Lovelace architecture.

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_90`
|2
|NVIDIA Hopper architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx700`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX7 (Sea Islands (CI)) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx701`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX7 (Sea Islands (CI)) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx702`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX7 (Sea Islands (CI)) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx801`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX8 (Volcanic Islands (VI)) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx802`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX8 (Volcanic Islands (VI)) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx803`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX8 (Volcanic Islands (VI)) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx805`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX8 (Volcanic Islands (VI)) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx810`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX8 (Volcanic Islands (VI)) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx900`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX9 (Vega) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx902`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX9 (Vega) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx904`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX9 (Vega) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx906`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX9 (Vega) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx908`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX9 (Vega) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx90a`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX9 (Vega) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx1010`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX10.1 (RDNA 1) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx1011`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX10.1 (RDNA 1) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx1012`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX10.1 (RDNA 1) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx1013`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX10.1 (RDNA 1) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx1030`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX10.3 (RDNA 2) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx1031`
|2
|GCN GFX10.3 (RDNA 2) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx1032`
|2
|GCN GFX10.3 (RDNA 2) architecture.

|===

[NOTE]
====
* An "alias" enumerator is generally added for new devices only after hardware
has finalized and the exact version is known.
* For NVIDIA GPUs, the architecture enumerator corresponds to the
https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#compute-capabilities[compute capability]
of the device, and ext_oneapi_architecture_is can be used similarly to the \\__CUDA_ARCH__ macro in CUDA.
====


=== New `if_architecture_is` free function

This extension adds one new free function which may be called from device
code.  This function is not available in host code.

```
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

template<architecture ...Archs, typename ...Args, typename T>
/* unspecified */ if_architecture_is(T fn, Args ...args);

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
```

This function operates exactly like `if_device_has` from the
link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_device_if.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_device_if]
extension except that the condition gating execution of the callable function
`fn` is determined by the `Archs` parameter pack.  This condition is `true` if
the device which executes `if_architecture_is` matches **any** of the
architectures listed in this pack.

The value returned by `if_architecture_is` is an object _F_ of an unspecified
type, which provides the following member functions:

```
class /* unspecified */ {
 public:
  template<architecture ...Archs, typename ...Args, typename T>
  /* unspecified */ else_if_architecture_is(T fn, Args ...args);

  template<typename T, typename ...Args>
  void otherwise(T fn, Args ...args);
};
```

The `otherwise` function behaves exactly like the `otherwise` function from the
link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_device_if.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_device_if]
extension.  The `else_if_architecture_is` function behaves exactly like
`else_if_device_has` from that extension except that the condition gating
execution of the callable object `fn` is determined by the `Archs` parameter
pack.  This condition is `true` only if the object _F_ comes from a previous
call to `if_architecture_is` or `else_if_architecture_is` whose condition is
`false` *and* if the device calling `else_if_architecture_is` has one of the
architectures in the `Archs` parameter pack.


== Future direction

This experimental extension is still evolving.  We expect that future versions
will include the following:

* An extended member function like:
+
--
```
namespace sycl {

class device {
  bool ext_oneapi_architecture_is(
    ext::oneapi::experimental::architecture arch);
};

// namespace sycl
```

This provides a way to query a device's architecture from host code.
--

* An extended device information descriptor named
  `sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::info::device::architecture`, which returns
  the architecture of the device.  This allows host code such as:
+
--
```
using namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental;

architecture arch = dev.get_info<info::device::architecture>();
switch (arch) {
case architecture::x86_64:
  /* ... */
  break;
case architecture::intel_gpu_bdw:
  /* ... */
  break;
/* etc. */
}
```
--

* A compile-time constant property that can be used to decorate kernels and
  non-kernel device functions:
+
--
```
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

struct device_architecture_is_key {
  template <architecture... Archs>
  using value_t = property_value<device_architecture_is_key,
    std::integral_constant<architecture, Archs>...>;
};

template <architecture... Archs>
struct property_value<device_architecture_is_key,
  std::integral_constant<architecture, Archs>...>
{
  static constexpr std::array<architecture, sizeof...(Archs)> value;
};

template <architecture... Archs>
inline constexpr device_architecture_is_key::value_t<Archs...>
  device_architecture_is;

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
```

This property indicates that a kernel or non-kernel device function uses
features that are available on devices with the given architecture list but
may not be available on devices with other architectures.
--

* Additional enumerators in the `architecture` enumeration.  This could include
  entries for different x86_64 architectures.

Commit message:

[SYCL][DOC] Add device_arch experimental language
The sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture extension got moved from
"proposed" to "experimental", but we forgot to change the Status
section to reflect this.  Do that now, and also list the limitations
with our current implementation.

sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture.asciidoc, after:

= sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}


== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2022-2023 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.


== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues


== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 5 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.


== Status

This is an experimental extension specification, intended to provide early
access to features and gather community feedback.  Interfaces defined in this
specification are implemented in {dpcpp}, but they are not finalized and may
change incompatibly in future versions of {dpcpp} without prior notice.
*Shipping software products should not rely on APIs defined in this
specification.*

There are important limitations with the {dpcpp} implementation of this
experimental extension.  In particular, this extension may only be used when
the application is compiled in AOT mode.  See the section below titled
"Limitations with the experimental version" for a full description of the
limitations.


== Overview

This extension provides a way for device code to query the device architecture
on which it is running.  This is similar to the
link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_device_if.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_device_if]
extension except the comparison is for the device's architecture not the
device's aspects.  In some cases, low-level application code can use special
features or do specific optimizations depending on the device architecture, and
this extension enables such applications.


== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_DEVICE_ARCHITECTURE` to one of the values defined in the
table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to
determine if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test
the macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the
implementation supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|Initial version of this extension.

|2
|NVIDIA and AMD architectures are added.
|===

=== New enumeration of architectures

This extension adds a new enumeration of the architectures that can be tested.

```
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

enum class architecture : /* unspecified */ {
  x86_64,
  intel_gpu_bdw,
  intel_gpu_skl,
  intel_gpu_kbl,
  intel_gpu_cfl,
  intel_gpu_apl,
  intel_gpu_glk,
  intel_gpu_whl,
  intel_gpu_aml,
  intel_gpu_cml,
  intel_gpu_icllp,
  intel_gpu_ehl,
  intel_gpu_tgllp,
  intel_gpu_rkl,
  intel_gpu_adl_s,
  intel_gpu_rpl_s,
  intel_gpu_adl_p,
  intel_gpu_adl_n,
  intel_gpu_dg1,
  intel_gpu_acm_g10,
  intel_gpu_acm_g11,
  intel_gpu_acm_g12,
  intel_gpu_pvc,

  nvidia_gpu_sm_50,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_52,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_53,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_60,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_61,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_62,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_70,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_72,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_75,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_80,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_86,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_87,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_89,
  nvidia_gpu_sm_90,

  amd_gpu_gfx700,
  amd_gpu_gfx701,
  amd_gpu_gfx702,
  amd_gpu_gfx801,
  amd_gpu_gfx802,
  amd_gpu_gfx803,
  amd_gpu_gfx805,
  amd_gpu_gfx810,
  amd_gpu_gfx900,
  amd_gpu_gfx902,
  amd_gpu_gfx904,
  amd_gpu_gfx906,
  amd_gpu_gfx908,
  amd_gpu_gfx90a,
  amd_gpu_gfx1010,
  amd_gpu_gfx1011,
  amd_gpu_gfx1012,
  amd_gpu_gfx1013,
  amd_gpu_gfx1030,
  amd_gpu_gfx1031,
  amd_gpu_gfx1032,

  intel_gpu_8_0_0 = intel_gpu_bdw,
  intel_gpu_9_0_9 = intel_gpu_skl,
  intel_gpu_9_1_9 = intel_gpu_kbl
  intel_gpu_9_2_9 = intel_gpu_cfl,
  intel_gpu_9_3_0 = intel_gpu_apl,
  intel_gpu_9_4_0 = intel_gpu_glk,
  intel_gpu_9_5_0 = intel_gpu_whl,
  intel_gpu_9_6_0 = intel_gpu_aml,
  intel_gpu_9_7_0 = intel_gpu_cml,
  intel_gpu_11_0_0 = intel_gpu_icllp,
  intel_gpu_11_2_0 = intel_gpu_ehl,
  intel_gpu_12_0_0 = intel_gpu_tgllp,
  intel_gpu_12_10_0 = intel_gpu_dg1 
};

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
```

The following table tells which version of this extension first included each
of these enumerators, and it provides a brief description of their meanings.

[%header,cols="5,1,5"]
|===
|Enumerator name
|Added in version
|Description

|`x86_64`
|1
|Any CPU device with the x86_64 instruction set.

|`intel_gpu_bdw`
|1
|Broadwell Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_skl`
|1
|Broadwell Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_kbl`
|1
|Kaby Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_cfl`
|1
|Coffee Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_apl`
|1
|Apollo Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_glk`
|1
|Gemini Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_whl`
|1
|Whiskey Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_aml`
|1
|Amber Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_cml`
|1
|Comet Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_icllp`
|1
|Ice Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_ehl`
|1
|Elkhart Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_tgllp`
|1
|Tiger Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_rkl`
|1
|Rocket Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_adl_s`
|1
|Alder Lake S Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_rpl_s`
|1
|Raptor Lake Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_adl_p`
|1
|Alder Lake P Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_adl_n`
|1
|Alder Lake N Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_dg1`
|1
|DG1 Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_acm_g10`
|1
|Alchemist G10 Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_acm_g11`
|1
|Alchemist G11 Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_acm_g12`
|1
|Alchemist G12 Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_pvc`
|1
|Ponte Vecchio Intel graphics architecture.

|`intel_gpu_8_0_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_bdw`.

|`intel_gpu_9_0_9`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_skl`.

|`intel_gpu_9_1_9`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_kbl`.

|`intel_gpu_9_2_9`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_cfl`.

|`intel_gpu_9_3_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_apl`.

|`intel_gpu_9_4_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_glk`.

|`intel_gpu_9_5_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_whl`.

|`intel_gpu_9_6_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_aml`.

|`intel_gpu_9_7_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_cml`.

|`intel_gpu_11_0_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_icllp`.

|`intel_gpu_11_2_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_ehl`.

|`intel_gpu_12_0_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_tgllp`.

|`intel_gpu_12_10_0`
|1
|Alias for `intel_gpu_dg1`.

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_50`
|2
|NVIDIA Maxwell architecture (compute capability 5.0).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_52`
|2
|NVIDIA Maxwell architecture (compute capability 5.2).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_53`
|2
|NVIDIA Maxwell architecture (compute capability 5.3).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_60`
|2
|NVIDIA Pascal architecture (compute capability 6.0).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_61`
|2
|NVIDIA Pascal architecture (compute capability 6.1).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_62`
|2
|NVIDIA Pascal architecture (compute capability 6.2).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_70`
|2
|NVIDIA Volta architecture (compute capability 7.0).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_72`
|2
|NVIDIA Volta architecture (compute capability 7.2).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_75`
|2
|NVIDIA Turing architecture (compute capability 7.5).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_80`
|2
|NVIDIA Ampere architecture (compute capability 8.0).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_86`
|2
|NVIDIA Ampere architecture (compute capability 8.6).

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_87`
|2
|Jetson/Drive AGX Orin architecture.

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_89`
|2
|NVIDIA Ada Lovelace architecture.

|`nvidia_gpu_sm_90`
|2
|NVIDIA Hopper architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx700`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX7 (Sea Islands (CI)) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx701`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX7 (Sea Islands (CI)) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx702`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX7 (Sea Islands (CI)) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx801`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX8 (Volcanic Islands (VI)) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx802`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX8 (Volcanic Islands (VI)) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx803`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX8 (Volcanic Islands (VI)) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx805`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX8 (Volcanic Islands (VI)) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx810`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX8 (Volcanic Islands (VI)) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx900`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX9 (Vega) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx902`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX9 (Vega) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx904`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX9 (Vega) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx906`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX9 (Vega) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx908`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX9 (Vega) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx90a`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX9 (Vega) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx1010`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX10.1 (RDNA 1) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx1011`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX10.1 (RDNA 1) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx1012`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX10.1 (RDNA 1) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx1013`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX10.1 (RDNA 1) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx1030`
|2
|AMD GCN GFX10.3 (RDNA 2) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx1031`
|2
|GCN GFX10.3 (RDNA 2) architecture.

|`amd_gpu_gfx1032`
|2
|GCN GFX10.3 (RDNA 2) architecture.

|===

[NOTE]
====
* An "alias" enumerator is generally added for new devices only after hardware
has finalized and the exact version is known.
* For NVIDIA GPUs, the architecture enumerator corresponds to the
https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#compute-capabilities[compute capability]
of the device, and ext_oneapi_architecture_is can be used similarly to the \\__CUDA_ARCH__ macro in CUDA.
====


=== New `if_architecture_is` free function

This extension adds one new free function which may be called from device
code.  This function is not available in host code.

```
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

template<architecture ...Archs, typename ...Args, typename T>
/* unspecified */ if_architecture_is(T fn, Args ...args);

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
```

This function operates exactly like `if_device_has` from the
link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_device_if.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_device_if]
extension except that the condition gating execution of the callable function
`fn` is determined by the `Archs` parameter pack.  This condition is `true` if
the device which executes `if_architecture_is` matches **any** of the
architectures listed in this pack.

The value returned by `if_architecture_is` is an object _F_ of an unspecified
type, which provides the following member functions:

```
class /* unspecified */ {
 public:
  template<architecture ...Archs, typename ...Args, typename T>
  /* unspecified */ else_if_architecture_is(T fn, Args ...args);

  template<typename T, typename ...Args>
  void otherwise(T fn, Args ...args);
};
```

The `otherwise` function behaves exactly like the `otherwise` function from the
link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_device_if.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_device_if]
extension.  The `else_if_architecture_is` function behaves exactly like
`else_if_device_has` from that extension except that the condition gating
execution of the callable object `fn` is determined by the `Archs` parameter
pack.  This condition is `true` only if the object _F_ comes from a previous
call to `if_architecture_is` or `else_if_architecture_is` whose condition is
`false` *and* if the device calling `else_if_architecture_is` has one of the
architectures in the `Archs` parameter pack.


== Limitations with the experimental version

The {dpcpp} implementation of this extension currently has some important
limitations.  The application must be compiled in ahead-of-time (AOT) mode
using `-fsycl-targets=<special-target>` where `<special-target>` is one of the
"special target values" listed in the link:../../UsersManual.md[users manual]
description of the `-fsycl-targets` option.  These are the target names of the
form "intel_gpu_*", "nvidia_gpu_*", or "amd_gpu_*".


== Future direction

This experimental extension is still evolving.  We expect that future versions
will include the following:

* An extended member function like:
+
--
```
namespace sycl {

class device {
  bool ext_oneapi_architecture_is(
    ext::oneapi::experimental::architecture arch);
};

// namespace sycl
```

This provides a way to query a device's architecture from host code.
--

* An extended device information descriptor named
  `sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::info::device::architecture`, which returns
  the architecture of the device.  This allows host code such as:
+
--
```
using namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental;

architecture arch = dev.get_info<info::device::architecture>();
switch (arch) {
case architecture::x86_64:
  /* ... */
  break;
case architecture::intel_gpu_bdw:
  /* ... */
  break;
/* etc. */
}
```
--

* A compile-time constant property that can be used to decorate kernels and
  non-kernel device functions:
+
--
```
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

struct device_architecture_is_key {
  template <architecture... Archs>
  using value_t = property_value<device_architecture_is_key,
    std::integral_constant<architecture, Archs>...>;
};

template <architecture... Archs>
struct property_value<device_architecture_is_key,
  std::integral_constant<architecture, Archs>...>
{
  static constexpr std::array<architecture, sizeof...(Archs)> value;
};

template <architecture... Archs>
inline constexpr device_architecture_is_key::value_t<Archs...>
  device_architecture_is;

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
```

This property indicates that a kernel or non-kernel device function uses
features that are available on devices with the given architecture list but
may not be available on devices with other architectures.
--

* Additional enumerators in the `architecture` enumeration.  This could include
  entries for different x86_64 architectures.
