sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_cuda_async_barrier.asciidoc, before:

= sycl_ext_oneapi_cuda_async_barrier

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2022-2022 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 4 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.

== Status

This is an experimental extension specification, intended to provide early
access to features and gather community feedback.  Interfaces defined in this
specification are implemented in {dpcpp}, but they are not finalized and may
change incompatibly in future versions of {dpcpp} without prior notice.
*Shipping software products should not rely on APIs defined in this
specification.*

[NOTE]
====
This extension is currently implemented in {dpcpp} only for NVIDIA GPU devices 
Łwith Compute Capability of 8.0 or above and
only when using the CUDA backend. Attempting to use this extension in
kernels that run on other devices or backends may result in undefined behavior.
Be aware that the compiler is not able to issue a diagnostic to warn you if
this happens.

TODO: update this message
====

== Introduction

This document describes an extension that adds `barrier`, which acts similarly 
to https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/thread/barrier[`std::barrier`].

== Specification

=== Feature Test Macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification section 6.3.3 "Feature test macros".  Therefore, an
implementation supporting this extension must predefine the macro
`SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_CUDA_ASYNC_BARRIER` to one of the values defined in the table
below. Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine if
the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the macro's
value to determine which of the extension's APIs the implementation supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value |Description
|1     |Initial extension version.  Base features are supported.
|===

=== Overview

This extension introduces asynchronous barrier for CUDA devices. This extends 
`group_barrier` by splitting it into into two calls - arrive and wait. The 
wait call blocks until the predetermined number of work items in the same work 
group call arrive. This is also very similar to 
https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/thread/barrier[`std::barrier`] introduced 
in c++20.

Implementing this requires some space in local memory, where the state of the 
barrier is kept (this is true even for the CUDA compute capability 8 that 
support this functionality in hardware).

This extension introduces a `barrier` class, encapsulating the state of an 
asynchronous barrier. It must be used only in local memory, and reserves space 
in local memory even on hardware with native support (e.g. devices with CUDA 
Compute Capability 8.0). Once a barrier is initialized, it can be reused for 
multiple cycles of arrivals and waits.

The barrier class is an optional kernel feature as defined by the core SYCL 
specification section 5.7 "Optional kernel features". This class may only be 
used on devices that have the `aspect::ext_oneapi_cuda_async_barrier` aspect. 
Attempting to submit a kernel using this class to another device causes the 
kernel invocation command (e.g. parallel_for) to throw a synchronous exception 
with the errc::kernel_not_supported error code.

==== Cycle of arrivals and waits

After a predetermined number of arrivals, the barrier moves into the next 
cycle. Any `wait` that was previously called with the arrival token from this 
cycle is unblocked, and future calls to `wait` with the arrival token from 
this cycle will not block. The pending count is reset and any future arrivals 
happen in the next cycle. However, at least one `wait` (or `test_wait` 
returning `true`) must happen with the arrival token from the current cycle 
before any arrivals can happen in the next cycle. Another arrival happening 
before the `wait` is undefined behavior.

`wait` and `test_wait` can only be called with an arrival token from the 
current cycle (in which case `wait` will block until the barrier moves into 
next cycle) or the previous cycle (in which case `wait` will not block). 
Calling `wait` or `test_wait` with an arrival token from any other cycle 
results in undefined behavior.

==== Interface

`barrier` class has the following member functions:

`void initialize(uint32_t expected_count)` : Initializes the barrier with an 
expected number of arrivals, representing the number of arrivals required to 
unblock calls to `wait`. This function only needs to be called by one 
work-item in work group. After the initialization a barrier operation (such as 
`group_barrier()`) needs to be executed by all work-items using the `barrier` 
object before they can use the newly initialized `barrier` object. If 
`expected_count` is greater than the value returned by `max()`, behavior 
is undefined.

`void invalidate()` : Invalidates a previously initialized barrier, enabling 
its associated memory to be repurposed. This function must be called by only 
one work-item in the work group. Before the invalidation a barrier operation 
(such as `group_barrier()`) needs to be executed by all work-items using the 
`barrier` object, after the last call on the `barrier`. After the 
invalidation a barrier operation (such as `group_barrier()`) needs to be 
executed by any work-items reusing the memory before the memory is reused. 
Calling any member function except `initialize()` on an invalidated barrier 
results in undefined behavior.

`arrival_token arrive()` : Executes arrival operation and returns a token 
that is needed for the `wait` call corresponding to this arrival.

`arrival_token arrive_and_drop()` : Reduces expected arrival count for future 
cycles by one, executes arrival operation and returns a token that is needed 
for the `wait` call corresponding to this arrival.

`arrival_token arrive_no_complete(int32_t count)` : Executes arrival operation
 that counts as `count` arrivals and returns a token that is needed for the 
 `wait` call corresponding to this arrival. If this is the last arrival that 
 causes the cycle to complete, behavior is undefined. That means `count` must 
 be strictly lower than the remaining number of arrivals required to complete 
 this cycle.

This can be used to signal many arrivals by one function call. However, it 
should not be used on its own, as it can not be the last arrival in a cycle. 
So it should either be followed with a call to `arrive` or by a barrier 
operation, such as (such as `group_barrier()`) after which a different 
work-item is guaranteed to call `arrive` within the same cycle. 

`arrival_token arrive_and_drop_no_complete(int32_t count)` : Reduces expected 
arrival count for future cycles by `count`, executes arrival operation that 
counts as `count` arrivals and returns a token that is needed for the wait 
call corresponding to this arrival. This must not be the last arrival thet 
causes the cycle to complete - it would be undefined behavior. That means 
`count` must be strictly lower than the remaining number of arrivals required 
to complete this cycle.

This can be used to signal many arrivals by one function call. However, it 
should not be used on its own, as it can not be the last arrival in a cycle. 
So it should either be followed with a call to `arrive` or by a barrier 
operation, such as (such as `group_barrier()`) after which a different 
work-item is guaranteed to call `arrive` within the same cycle. 

`void arrive_copy_async()` : Schedules arrive operation to be triggered
asynchronously when all previous asynchronous memory copies initiated by the 
calling work item complete. Before the arrive operation is triggered, the 
pending count on the barrier is increased by 1, so after the arrival there is 
no change to the pending count. Pending count with the increase by this call 
must not exceed the value returned by `max`. If it does, it causes undefined 
behavior.

`void arrive_copy_async_no_inc()` : Schedules arrive operation to be triggered 
asynchronously when all previous asynchronous memory copies initiated by the 
calling work item complete.

`void wait(arrival_token arrival)` : Executes wait operation, blocking until 
the predetermined number of work items have called `arrive`.

`bool test_wait(arrival_token arrival)` : Checks whether all the arrivals have 
already happened for the current cycle, returning `true` if they did and 
`false` if `wait(arrival)` would block.

`void arrive_and_wait()` : Equivalent to calling `wait(arrive())`.

`static constexpr uint64_t max()` : Returns the maximum value of the expected 
and pending counts supported by the implementation.

==== Sample Header

[source, c++]
----
namespace sycl {
namespace ext {
namespace oneapi {
namespace cuda {

class barrier {
  [implementation defined internal state]

public:
  using arrival_token = [implementation defined];

  // barriers cannot be moved or copied
  barrier(const barrier &other) = delete;
  barrier(barrier &&other) noexcept = delete;
  barrier &operator=(const barrier &other) = delete;
  barrier &operator=(barrier &&other) noexcept = delete;

  void initialize(uint32_t expected_count);
  void invalidate();
  arrival_token arrive();
  arrival_token arrive_and_drop();
  arrival_token arrive_no_complete(int32_t count);
  arrival_token arrive_and_drop_no_complete(int32_t count);
  void arrive_copy_async();
  void arrive_copy_async_no_inc();
  void wait(arrival_token arrival);
  bool test_wait(arrival_token arrival);
  void arrive_and_wait();
  static constexpr uint64_t max();
};

} // namespace cuda
} // namespace oneapi
} // namespace ext
} // namespace sycl
----

== Examples

[source, c++]
----
using namespace sycl;
using namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::cuda;

[...]

q.submit([&](handler &cgh) {
  auto acc = buf.get_access<access::mode::read_write>(cgh);
  accessor<int, 1, access::mode::read_write, access::target::local> loc(
      N, cgh);
  accessor<barrier, 1, access::mode::read_write, access::target::local>
      loc_barrier(2, cgh);
  cgh.parallel_for(nd_range<1>(N, N), [=](nd_item<1> item) {
    size_t idx = item.get_local_linear_id();
    loc[idx] = acc[idx];
    if (idx <= 2) {
      loc_barrier[idx].initialize(N);
    }
    item.barrier(access::fence_space::local_space);
    for (int i = 0; i < N; i++) {
      int val = loc[idx];
      barrier::arrival_token arr = loc_barrier[0].arrive();
      val += 1;
      int dst_idx = (idx + 1) % N;
      loc_barrier[0].wait(arr);
      loc[dst_idx] = val;
      loc_barrier[1].wait(loc_barrier[1].arrive());
    }
    acc[idx] = loc[idx];
  });
});
----

[source, c++]
----
using namespace sycl;
using namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::cuda;

[...]

q.submit([&](handler &cgh) {
  auto acc = buf.get_access<access::mode::read_write>(cgh);
  accessor<int, 1, access::mode::read_write, access::target::local> loc(
      N, cgh);
  accessor<barrier, 1, access::mode::read_write, access::target::local>
      loc_barrier(2, cgh);
  cgh.parallel_for(nd_range<1>(N, N), [=](nd_item<1> item) {
    size_t idx = item.get_local_linear_id();
    if (idx == 0) {
      loc_barrier[0].initialize(2*N);
    }
    item.barrier(access::fence_space::local_space);
    item.async_work_group_copy(loc.get_pointer(), data_acc.get_pointer(),
                                N);
    loc_barrier->arrive_copy_async_no_inc();

    [... do some other work ...]

    loc_barrier->arrive_and_wait();

    [... use copied data ...]

  });
});
----

[source, c++]
----
using namespace sycl;
using namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::cuda;

[...]

q.submit([&](handler &cgh) {
  auto acc = buf.get_access<access::mode::read_write>(cgh);
  accessor<int, 1, access::mode::read_write, access::target::local> loc(
      N, cgh);
  accessor<barrier, 1, access::mode::read_write, access::target::local>
      loc_barrier(2, cgh);
  cgh.parallel_for(nd_range<1>(N, N), [=](nd_item<1> item) {
    size_t idx = item.get_local_linear_id();
    loc[idx] = acc[idx];
    if (idx <= 2) {
      loc_barrier[idx].initialize(N/2);
    }
    item.barrier(access::fence_space::local_space);
    for(int i=0; i<N; i++){
      if(idx > i){

        [...]

        barrier::arrival_token arr = loc_barrier->arrive();

        [...]
        
        loc_barrier->wait(arr);

        [...]

      }
    } else if(idx == i){

        [...]

        loc_barrier->arrive_and_drop();
        break;
    }
  });
});
----

== Issues

. Is `barrier` the best name? Reasons for that name are that it is mostly in 
line with c+\+20 `std::barrier` and CUDA has the same name for this 
functionality. However it might be confusing with `group_barrier`, which is not 
present in c++20 and has a different name in CUDA - `__syncthreads`. Earlier 
version of CUDA docs called this `awbarrier`. Now that name is deprecated and 
they call it asynchronous barrier in text and `barrier` in code. Related PTX 
instructions use `mbarrier`. Other ideas for the name: "non-blocking barrier" 
and "split barrier".
--
*RESOLUTION*: We will use the name `barrier`.
--

== Resources
* https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#aw-barrier
* https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/parallel-thread-execution/index.html#parallel-synchronization-and-communication-instructions-mbarrier
* https://nvidia.github.io/libcudacxx/extended_api/synchronization_primitives/barrier.html

Commit message:

added explanation of limitations and fixed namespace in spec

sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_cuda_async_barrier.asciidoc, after:

= sycl_ext_oneapi_cuda_async_barrier

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2022-2022 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 4 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.

== Status

This is an experimental extension specification, intended to provide early
access to features and gather community feedback.  Interfaces defined in this
specification are implemented in {dpcpp}, but they are not finalized and may
change incompatibly in future versions of {dpcpp} without prior notice.
*Shipping software products should not rely on APIs defined in this
specification.*

[NOTE]
====
This extension is currently implemented in {dpcpp} only for NVIDIA GPU devices 
Łwith Compute Capability of 8.0 or above and
only when using the CUDA backend. Attempting to use this extension in
kernels that run on other devices or backends may result in undefined behavior.
Be aware that the compiler is not able to issue a diagnostic to warn you if
this happens.

TODO: update this message
====

== Introduction

This document describes an extension that adds `barrier`, which acts similarly 
to https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/thread/barrier[`std::barrier`].

== Specification

=== Feature Test Macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification section 6.3.3 "Feature test macros".  Therefore, an
implementation supporting this extension must predefine the macro
`SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_CUDA_ASYNC_BARRIER` to one of the values defined in the table
below. Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine if
the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the macro's
value to determine which of the extension's APIs the implementation supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value |Description
|1     |Initial extension version.  Base features are supported.
|===

=== Overview

This extension introduces asynchronous barrier for CUDA devices. This extends 
`group_barrier` by splitting it into into two calls - arrive and wait. The 
wait call blocks until the predetermined number of work items in the same work 
group call arrive. This is also very similar to 
https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/thread/barrier[`std::barrier`] introduced 
in c++20.

Implementing this requires some space in local memory, where the state of the 
barrier is kept (this is true even for the CUDA compute capability 8 that 
support this functionality in hardware).

This extension introduces a `barrier` class, encapsulating the state of an 
asynchronous barrier. It must be used only in local memory, and reserves space 
in local memory even on hardware with native support (e.g. devices with CUDA 
Compute Capability 8.0). Once a barrier is initialized, it can be reused for 
multiple cycles of arrivals and waits.

The barrier class is an optional kernel feature as defined by the core SYCL 
specification section 5.7 "Optional kernel features". This class may only be 
used on devices that have the `aspect::ext_oneapi_cuda_async_barrier` aspect. 
Attempting to submit a kernel using this class to another device causes the 
kernel invocation command (e.g. parallel_for) to throw a synchronous exception 
with the errc::kernel_not_supported error code.

Currently the design for optional device features is not fully implemented, so 
error handling explained in the paragraph above has certain limitations:

- Applications that target heterogeneous devices will need to be careful using 
this extension if one of the devices does not support this CUDA feature. 
Kernels using this extension may need to be split into a separate translation 
unit or be linked with -fsycl-device-code-split=per_kernel in order to avoid 
false compilation errors.

- If an application mistakenly submits a kernel using this extension to a 
device that does not support it, they may not get a synchronous exception as 
stated above (instead the error will be asynchronous).

==== Cycle of arrivals and waits

After a predetermined number of arrivals, the barrier moves into the next 
cycle. Any `wait` that was previously called with the arrival token from this 
cycle is unblocked, and future calls to `wait` with the arrival token from 
this cycle will not block. The pending count is reset and any future arrivals 
happen in the next cycle. However, at least one `wait` (or `test_wait` 
returning `true`) must happen with the arrival token from the current cycle 
before any arrivals can happen in the next cycle. Another arrival happening 
before the `wait` is undefined behavior.

`wait` and `test_wait` can only be called with an arrival token from the 
current cycle (in which case `wait` will block until the barrier moves into 
next cycle) or the previous cycle (in which case `wait` will not block). 
Calling `wait` or `test_wait` with an arrival token from any other cycle 
results in undefined behavior.

==== Interface

`barrier` class has the following member functions:

`void initialize(uint32_t expected_count)` : Initializes the barrier with an 
expected number of arrivals, representing the number of arrivals required to 
unblock calls to `wait`. This function only needs to be called by one 
work-item in work group. After the initialization a barrier operation (such as 
`group_barrier()`) needs to be executed by all work-items using the `barrier` 
object before they can use the newly initialized `barrier` object. If 
`expected_count` is greater than the value returned by `max()`, behavior 
is undefined.

`void invalidate()` : Invalidates a previously initialized barrier, enabling 
its associated memory to be repurposed. This function must be called by only 
one work-item in the work group. Before the invalidation a barrier operation 
(such as `group_barrier()`) needs to be executed by all work-items using the 
`barrier` object, after the last call on the `barrier`. After the 
invalidation a barrier operation (such as `group_barrier()`) needs to be 
executed by any work-items reusing the memory before the memory is reused. 
Calling any member function except `initialize()` on an invalidated barrier 
results in undefined behavior.

`arrival_token arrive()` : Executes arrival operation and returns a token 
that is needed for the `wait` call corresponding to this arrival.

`arrival_token arrive_and_drop()` : Reduces expected arrival count for future 
cycles by one, executes arrival operation and returns a token that is needed 
for the `wait` call corresponding to this arrival.

`arrival_token arrive_no_complete(int32_t count)` : Executes arrival operation
 that counts as `count` arrivals and returns a token that is needed for the 
 `wait` call corresponding to this arrival. If this is the last arrival that 
 causes the cycle to complete, behavior is undefined. That means `count` must 
 be strictly lower than the remaining number of arrivals required to complete 
 this cycle.

This can be used to signal many arrivals by one function call. However, it 
should not be used on its own, as it can not be the last arrival in a cycle. 
So it should either be followed with a call to `arrive` or by a barrier 
operation, such as (such as `group_barrier()`) after which a different 
work-item is guaranteed to call `arrive` within the same cycle. 

`arrival_token arrive_and_drop_no_complete(int32_t count)` : Reduces expected 
arrival count for future cycles by `count`, executes arrival operation that 
counts as `count` arrivals and returns a token that is needed for the wait 
call corresponding to this arrival. This must not be the last arrival thet 
causes the cycle to complete - it would be undefined behavior. That means 
`count` must be strictly lower than the remaining number of arrivals required 
to complete this cycle.

This can be used to signal many arrivals by one function call. However, it 
should not be used on its own, as it can not be the last arrival in a cycle. 
So it should either be followed with a call to `arrive` or by a barrier 
operation, such as (such as `group_barrier()`) after which a different 
work-item is guaranteed to call `arrive` within the same cycle. 

`void arrive_copy_async()` : Schedules arrive operation to be triggered
asynchronously when all previous asynchronous memory copies initiated by the 
calling work item complete. Before the arrive operation is triggered, the 
pending count on the barrier is increased by 1, so after the arrival there is 
no change to the pending count. Pending count with the increase by this call 
must not exceed the value returned by `max`. If it does, it causes undefined 
behavior.

`void arrive_copy_async_no_inc()` : Schedules arrive operation to be triggered 
asynchronously when all previous asynchronous memory copies initiated by the 
calling work item complete.

`void wait(arrival_token arrival)` : Executes wait operation, blocking until 
the predetermined number of work items have called `arrive`.

`bool test_wait(arrival_token arrival)` : Checks whether all the arrivals have 
already happened for the current cycle, returning `true` if they did and 
`false` if `wait(arrival)` would block.

`void arrive_and_wait()` : Equivalent to calling `wait(arrive())`.

`static constexpr uint64_t max()` : Returns the maximum value of the expected 
and pending counts supported by the implementation.

==== Sample Header

[source, c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::cuda {

class barrier {
  [implementation defined internal state]

public:
  using arrival_token = [implementation defined];

  // barriers cannot be moved or copied
  barrier(const barrier &other) = delete;
  barrier(barrier &&other) noexcept = delete;
  barrier &operator=(const barrier &other) = delete;
  barrier &operator=(barrier &&other) noexcept = delete;

  void initialize(uint32_t expected_count);
  void invalidate();
  arrival_token arrive();
  arrival_token arrive_and_drop();
  arrival_token arrive_no_complete(int32_t count);
  arrival_token arrive_and_drop_no_complete(int32_t count);
  void arrive_copy_async();
  void arrive_copy_async_no_inc();
  void wait(arrival_token arrival);
  bool test_wait(arrival_token arrival);
  void arrive_and_wait();
  static constexpr uint64_t max();
};

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::cuda
----

== Examples

[source, c++]
----
using namespace sycl;
using namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::cuda;

[...]

q.submit([&](handler &cgh) {
  auto acc = buf.get_access<access::mode::read_write>(cgh);
  accessor<int, 1, access::mode::read_write, access::target::local> loc(
      N, cgh);
  accessor<barrier, 1, access::mode::read_write, access::target::local>
      loc_barrier(2, cgh);
  cgh.parallel_for(nd_range<1>(N, N), [=](nd_item<1> item) {
    size_t idx = item.get_local_linear_id();
    loc[idx] = acc[idx];
    if (idx <= 2) {
      loc_barrier[idx].initialize(N);
    }
    item.barrier(access::fence_space::local_space);
    for (int i = 0; i < N; i++) {
      int val = loc[idx];
      barrier::arrival_token arr = loc_barrier[0].arrive();
      val += 1;
      int dst_idx = (idx + 1) % N;
      loc_barrier[0].wait(arr);
      loc[dst_idx] = val;
      loc_barrier[1].wait(loc_barrier[1].arrive());
    }
    acc[idx] = loc[idx];
  });
});
----

[source, c++]
----
using namespace sycl;
using namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::cuda;

[...]

q.submit([&](handler &cgh) {
  auto acc = buf.get_access<access::mode::read_write>(cgh);
  accessor<int, 1, access::mode::read_write, access::target::local> loc(
      N, cgh);
  accessor<barrier, 1, access::mode::read_write, access::target::local>
      loc_barrier(2, cgh);
  cgh.parallel_for(nd_range<1>(N, N), [=](nd_item<1> item) {
    size_t idx = item.get_local_linear_id();
    if (idx == 0) {
      loc_barrier[0].initialize(2*N);
    }
    item.barrier(access::fence_space::local_space);
    item.async_work_group_copy(loc.get_pointer(), data_acc.get_pointer(),
                                N);
    loc_barrier->arrive_copy_async_no_inc();

    [... do some other work ...]

    loc_barrier->arrive_and_wait();

    [... use copied data ...]

  });
});
----

[source, c++]
----
using namespace sycl;
using namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::cuda;

[...]

q.submit([&](handler &cgh) {
  auto acc = buf.get_access<access::mode::read_write>(cgh);
  accessor<int, 1, access::mode::read_write, access::target::local> loc(
      N, cgh);
  accessor<barrier, 1, access::mode::read_write, access::target::local>
      loc_barrier(2, cgh);
  cgh.parallel_for(nd_range<1>(N, N), [=](nd_item<1> item) {
    size_t idx = item.get_local_linear_id();
    loc[idx] = acc[idx];
    if (idx <= 2) {
      loc_barrier[idx].initialize(N/2);
    }
    item.barrier(access::fence_space::local_space);
    for(int i=0; i<N; i++){
      if(idx > i){

        [...]

        barrier::arrival_token arr = loc_barrier->arrive();

        [...]
        
        loc_barrier->wait(arr);

        [...]

      }
    } else if(idx == i){

        [...]

        loc_barrier->arrive_and_drop();
        break;
    }
  });
});
----

== Issues

. Is `barrier` the best name? Reasons for that name are that it is mostly in 
line with c+\+20 `std::barrier` and CUDA has the same name for this 
functionality. However it might be confusing with `group_barrier`, which is not 
present in c++20 and has a different name in CUDA - `__syncthreads`. Earlier 
version of CUDA docs called this `awbarrier`. Now that name is deprecated and 
they call it asynchronous barrier in text and `barrier` in code. Related PTX 
instructions use `mbarrier`. Other ideas for the name: "non-blocking barrier" 
and "split barrier".
--
*RESOLUTION*: We will use the name `barrier`.
--

== Resources
* https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#aw-barrier
* https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/parallel-thread-execution/index.html#parallel-synchronization-and-communication-instructions-mbarrier
* https://nvidia.github.io/libcudacxx/extended_api/synchronization_primitives/barrier.html
