sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_composite_device.asciidoc, before:

= sycl_ext_oneapi_composite_device

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}


== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2023-2023 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.


== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues


== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 8 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.


== Status

This is a proposed extension specification, intended to gather community
feedback.  Interfaces defined in this specification may not be implemented yet
or may be in a preliminary state.  The specification itself may also change in
incompatible ways before it is finalized.  *Shipping software products should
not rely on APIs defined in this specification.*


== Backend support status

The APIs defined in this extension are only useful when using the Level Zero
backend, and they are only useful when the Level Zero environment variable
`ZE_FLAT_DEVICE_HIERARCHY=COMBINED` is set.  The APIs may be called even when
using other backends, but they will return an empty list of composite devices.


== Overview

Some Intel GPU architectures are structured with multiple tiles on a single
card.  Currently, this applies only to the Intel(R) Data Center GPU Max Series
(aka PVC).  By default, SYCL exposes each of these tiles as a separate root
device, so each tile corresponds to a separate `device` object that is returned
from `device::get_devices`.  Applications generally perform better when each
tile is treated as a separate device, but some advanced use cases can benefit
by treating all tiles on a card as a single "composite" device.  This extension
provides APIs that enable these advanced use cases.

A composite device has the same semantics as any other SYCL device, though the
performance characteristics might be different.  The application may submit a
kernel to a composite device, and the implementation automatically schedules
work-items to each of the underlying tiles.  Memory allocated on the composite
device is accessible to any of these work-items, regardless of which underlying
tile it runs on.

Applications that use this extension can access the same hardware through
different `device` objects.  For example, it is possible to get one `device`
object that represents a card and another `device` object that represents a
tile from that card.  As noted previously, a device representing a card is
known as a "composite" device.  A device representing a tile is known as a
"component" of that composite device.  Since the tile-level devices are
returned from `device::get_devices`, they are also considered "root" devices,
which is a term defined in the core SYCL specification.


== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_COMPOSITE_DEVICE` to one of the values defined in the
table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to
determine if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test
the macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the
implementation supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not versioned, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===

=== Enumerating composite devices

This extension adds two new functions for enumerating the available composite
devices.  One is a free function and the other is a new member function of the
`platform` class:

```
namespace sycl {
namespace ext::oneapi::experimental {

std::vector<device> get_composite_devices();

} // namespace ext::oneapi::experimental

class platform {
  std::vector<device> ext_oneapi_get_composite_devices();
};

} // namespace sycl
```

The free function `get_composite_devices` returns all of the composite devices
across all platforms.  The member function
`platform::ext_oneapi_get_composite_devices` returns the composite devices
within the given platform.

The execution environment for a SYCL application has a fixed number of
composite devices which does not vary as the application executes.  As a
result, each call to these functions returns the same set of `device` objects,
and the order of those objects does not vary between calls.

=== New device information descriptors

This extension adds two new device information descriptors:

```
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::info::device {

struct component_devices;
struct composite_device;

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::info::device
```

[width="100%",%header,cols="37%,19%,44%"]
|===
|Device descriptor
|Return type
|Description

|`component_devices`
|`std::vector<device>`
|Returns the set of component devices that are contained by a composite device.
 If this device is not a composite device, an empty vector is returned.

|`composite_device`
|`device`
|This query may only be applied to a device that has
 `aspect::ext_oneapi_is_component`.  Returns the composite device which
 contains this component device.  Since the set of composite devices is fixed,
 the `device` object returned from this query is a copy of one of the `device`
 objects returned by `get_composite_devices`.

If this device does not have `aspect::ext_oneapi_is_component`, the
`device::get_info` function throws a synchronous `exception` with the
`errc::invalid` error code.
|===

=== New device aspects

This extension adds two new device aspects:

```
namespace sycl {

enum class aspect : /*unspecified*/ {
  ext_oneapi_is_composite,
  ext_oneapi_is_component
};

} // namespace sycl
```

[width="100%",%header,cols="50%,50%"]
|===
|Aspect
|Description

|`ext_oneapi_is_composite`
|Indicates that the device is a composite device.  Any device with this aspect
 will have at least two constituent component devices.

|`ext_oneapi_is_component`
|Indicates that the device is a component device of some other composite
 device.  This applies only to a root device that is a direct component of
 some composite device.  A sub-device will not have this aspect even if its
 parent is a component device.
|===

=== Impact on "descendent device"

This extension augments the definition of the term "descendent device" from the
core SYCL specification as follows.  Given some composite device _C_ and some
component of that composite device _R_, device _R_ is a descendent device of
_C_ and all descendent devices of _R_ are also descendent devices of _C_.

This definition means that a SYCL context that contains a composite device is
compatible with any of its component devices, even if those component devices
are not contained by the context.  See the core SYCL specification for details.


== Impact to the ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR

The `ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR` is an environment variable that is specific to the
{dpcpp} implementation.  Therefore, this section that describes the interaction
between this extension and that environment variable is non-normative and does
not apply to other SYCL implementations that may support this extension.

The `ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR` environment variable determines the list of root
devices that are returned from `device::get_devices`: _R0_, _R1_, _R2_, etc.
The devices returned from `get_composite_devices` are computed from this list
by iterating over the elements _Ri_ in order:

* Start with an empty list of composite devices.
* If device _Ri_ is a component of some composite device _C_ and if all other
  components of _C_ are also in the list of root devices returned from
  `device::get_devices`, then _C_ is appended to the list of composite devices
  unless _C_ is already in that list.

This algorithm ensures that a composite device is made visible to the
application only if all of its components are also visible.  This is important
for two reasons.  The first reason is philosophical.  We do not want to expose
a composite device unless it has at least two component devices.  This is
similar to our decision in the core SYCL spec to disallow partitioning into
sub-devices which results in only a single sub-device.  We don't want to expose
partitioning when the parent and child represent exactly the same hardware.
The second reason is practical.  The {dpcpp} implementation will associate
each composite device with a single Level Zero native device handle, which
represents the entire card.  There is no way to get a Level Zero handle that
represents a subset of the tiles.  Therefore, we do not expose a composite
device unless it represents all of the tiles on a card.

The algorithm also imposes a sensible order on the composite devices, which
corresponds to the order of the root devices.  Thus, users who set the order of
root devices via `ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR` will also get a corresponding order
for the composite devices.


== Issues

* What is the impact of this extension on
  link:../supported/sycl_ext_oneapi_default_context.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_default_context]?  I think there are two reasonable options.
  One option is to say that the default context is not affected by this
  extension.  As a result, applications that use composite devices will need to
  create their own context which contains the set of composite devices that
  they care about.  The other option is to change the default context to
  include all of the composite devices.  This would be easier to use because
  the default context continues to reflect all devices in the system.  As a
  result, the default context can be used in all scenarios, and an application
  only needs to create a custom one in order to gain some optimization.  It's
  not clear at this point if redefining the default context like this would
  result in a performance penalty for applications that don't use composite
  devices.

* What guarantees do we make (if any) about the accessibility of USM allocated
  on a composite device?  Do we guarantee that this memory is also accessible
  on the component devices?  Is the answer different for "device" USM vs.
  "shared" USM?  One option is to say that the application needs to
  specifically enable P2P access between a composite device and its component
  devices in order to guarantee accessibility.  There is a related question in
  the core SYCL spec about accessibility of USM w.r.t. sub-devices, which we
  have not yet resolved.

* Should the `ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR` be extended to allow selection of
  composite devices?  For example, syntax like
  `ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR=level_zero:C1` could mean "select the second Level
  Zero card device and expose it as a root device from
  ``device::get_devices``".  Our current thinking is that we should not allow
  syntax like this.

Commit message:

[SYCL][Doc] Default context with composite devices (#12282)
Clarify the impact of composite devices on a platform's default context.

sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_composite_device.asciidoc, after:

= sycl_ext_oneapi_composite_device

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}


== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2023-2024 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.


== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues


== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 8 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.


== Status

This is a proposed extension specification, intended to gather community
feedback.  Interfaces defined in this specification may not be implemented yet
or may be in a preliminary state.  The specification itself may also change in
incompatible ways before it is finalized.  *Shipping software products should
not rely on APIs defined in this specification.*


== Backend support status

The APIs defined in this extension are only useful when using the Level Zero
backend, and they are only useful when the Level Zero environment variable
`ZE_FLAT_DEVICE_HIERARCHY=COMBINED` is set.  The APIs may be called even when
using other backends, but they will return an empty list of composite devices.


== Overview

Some Intel GPU architectures are structured with multiple tiles on a single
card.  Currently, this applies only to the Intel(R) Data Center GPU Max Series
(aka PVC).  By default, SYCL exposes each of these tiles as a separate root
device, so each tile corresponds to a separate `device` object that is returned
from `device::get_devices`.  Applications generally perform better when each
tile is treated as a separate device, but some advanced use cases can benefit
by treating all tiles on a card as a single "composite" device.  This extension
provides APIs that enable these advanced use cases.

A composite device has the same semantics as any other SYCL device, though the
performance characteristics might be different.  The application may submit a
kernel to a composite device, and the implementation automatically schedules
work-items to each of the underlying tiles.  Memory allocated on the composite
device is accessible to any of these work-items, regardless of which underlying
tile it runs on.

Applications that use this extension can access the same hardware through
different `device` objects.  For example, it is possible to get one `device`
object that represents a card and another `device` object that represents a
tile from that card.  As noted previously, a device representing a card is
known as a "composite" device.  A device representing a tile is known as a
"component" of that composite device.  Since the tile-level devices are
returned from `device::get_devices`, they are also considered "root" devices,
which is a term defined in the core SYCL specification.


== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_COMPOSITE_DEVICE` to one of the values defined in the
table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to
determine if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test
the macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the
implementation supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not versioned, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===

=== Enumerating composite devices

This extension adds two new functions for enumerating the available composite
devices.  One is a free function and the other is a new member function of the
`platform` class:

```
namespace sycl {
namespace ext::oneapi::experimental {

std::vector<device> get_composite_devices();

} // namespace ext::oneapi::experimental

class platform {
  std::vector<device> ext_oneapi_get_composite_devices();
};

} // namespace sycl
```

The free function `get_composite_devices` returns all of the composite devices
across all platforms.  The member function
`platform::ext_oneapi_get_composite_devices` returns the composite devices
within the given platform.

The execution environment for a SYCL application has a fixed number of
composite devices which does not vary as the application executes.  As a
result, each call to these functions returns the same set of `device` objects,
and the order of those objects does not vary between calls.

=== New device information descriptors

This extension adds two new device information descriptors:

```
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::info::device {

struct component_devices;
struct composite_device;

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::info::device
```

[width="100%",%header,cols="37%,19%,44%"]
|===
|Device descriptor
|Return type
|Description

|`component_devices`
|`std::vector<device>`
|Returns the set of component devices that are contained by a composite device.
 If this device is not a composite device, an empty vector is returned.

|`composite_device`
|`device`
|This query may only be applied to a device that has
 `aspect::ext_oneapi_is_component`.  Returns the composite device which
 contains this component device.  Since the set of composite devices is fixed,
 the `device` object returned from this query is a copy of one of the `device`
 objects returned by `get_composite_devices`.

If this device does not have `aspect::ext_oneapi_is_component`, the
`device::get_info` function throws a synchronous `exception` with the
`errc::invalid` error code.
|===

=== New device aspects

This extension adds two new device aspects:

```
namespace sycl {

enum class aspect : /*unspecified*/ {
  ext_oneapi_is_composite,
  ext_oneapi_is_component
};

} // namespace sycl
```

[width="100%",%header,cols="50%,50%"]
|===
|Aspect
|Description

|`ext_oneapi_is_composite`
|Indicates that the device is a composite device.  Any device with this aspect
 will have at least two constituent component devices.

|`ext_oneapi_is_component`
|Indicates that the device is a component device of some other composite
 device.  This applies only to a root device that is a direct component of
 some composite device.  A sub-device will not have this aspect even if its
 parent is a component device.
|===

=== Impact on "descendent device"

This extension augments the definition of the term "descendent device" from the
core SYCL specification as follows.  Given some composite device _C_ and some
component of that composite device _R_, device _R_ is a descendent device of
_C_ and all descendent devices of _R_ are also descendent devices of _C_.

This definition means that a SYCL context that contains a composite device is
compatible with any of its component devices, even if those component devices
are not contained by the context.  See the core SYCL specification for details.

=== Interaction with the default context

If the implementation supports the
link:../supported/sycl_ext_oneapi_default_context.asciidoc[
sycl_ext_oneapi_default_context] extension, then each platform has the notion
of a default context.  This default context contains only the platform's root
devices, which are those returned by `platform::get_devices`.  Any composite
devices for the platform are not considered root devices, and thus the default
context does not include these composite devices.  If an application wants a
context that contains the composite devices, then it must explicitly create
such a context.


== Impact to the ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR

The `ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR` is an environment variable that is specific to the
{dpcpp} implementation.  Therefore, this section that describes the interaction
between this extension and that environment variable is non-normative and does
not apply to other SYCL implementations that may support this extension.

The `ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR` environment variable determines the list of root
devices that are returned from `device::get_devices`: _R0_, _R1_, _R2_, etc.
The devices returned from `get_composite_devices` are computed from this list
by iterating over the elements _Ri_ in order:

* Start with an empty list of composite devices.
* If device _Ri_ is a component of some composite device _C_ and if all other
  components of _C_ are also in the list of root devices returned from
  `device::get_devices`, then _C_ is appended to the list of composite devices
  unless _C_ is already in that list.

This algorithm ensures that a composite device is made visible to the
application only if all of its components are also visible.  This is important
for two reasons.  The first reason is philosophical.  We do not want to expose
a composite device unless it has at least two component devices.  This is
similar to our decision in the core SYCL spec to disallow partitioning into
sub-devices which results in only a single sub-device.  We don't want to expose
partitioning when the parent and child represent exactly the same hardware.
The second reason is practical.  The {dpcpp} implementation will associate
each composite device with a single Level Zero native device handle, which
represents the entire card.  There is no way to get a Level Zero handle that
represents a subset of the tiles.  Therefore, we do not expose a composite
device unless it represents all of the tiles on a card.

The algorithm also imposes a sensible order on the composite devices, which
corresponds to the order of the root devices.  Thus, users who set the order of
root devices via `ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR` will also get a corresponding order
for the composite devices.


== Issues

* What guarantees do we make (if any) about the accessibility of USM allocated
  on a composite device?  Do we guarantee that this memory is also accessible
  on the component devices?  Is the answer different for "device" USM vs.
  "shared" USM?  One option is to say that the application needs to
  specifically enable P2P access between a composite device and its component
  devices in order to guarantee accessibility.  There is a related question in
  the core SYCL spec about accessibility of USM w.r.t. sub-devices, which we
  have not yet resolved.

* Should the `ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR` be extended to allow selection of
  composite devices?  For example, syntax like
  `ONEAPI_DEVICE_SELECTOR=level_zero:C1` could mean "select the second Level
  Zero card device and expose it as a root device from
  ``device::get_devices``".  Our current thinking is that we should not allow
  syntax like this.
