sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_named_sub_group_sizes.asciidoc, before:

= sycl_ext_oneapi_named_sub_group_sizes

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}


== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2019-2022 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.


== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues


== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 4 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.

This extension also depends on the following other SYCL extensions:

* link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_properties]

* link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties]


== Status

This is an experimental extension specification, intended to provide early
access to features and gather community feedback.  Interfaces defined in this
specification are implemented in {dpcpp}, but they are not finalized and may
change incompatibly in future versions of {dpcpp} without prior notice.
*Shipping software products should not rely on APIs defined in this
specification.*


== Overview

SYCL provides a mechanism to set a required sub-group size for a kernel via
an attribute, and the sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties extension provides an
equivalent property.

Either mechanism is sufficient when tuning individual kernels for specific
devices, but their usage quickly becomes complicated in real-life scenarios
because:

1. An integral sub-group size must be provided at host compile-time.

2. The sub-group sizes supported by a device are not known until run-time.

3. It is common for the same sub-group size to be used for all kernels
   (e.g. because the sub-group size is reflected in data structures).

Applications wishing to write portable sub-group code that can target multiple
architectures must therefore multi-version their C++ code (e.g. via templates),
dispatch to the correct kernel(s) based on the result of a run-time query, and
repeat this process for every kernel individually.

This extension aims to simplify the process of using sub-groups by introducing
the notion of _named_ sub-group sizes, allowing developers to request a
sub-group size that meets certain requirements at host compile-time and
deferring the selection of a specific sub-group size until the kernel is
compiled for a specific device.

This extension also changes the default behavior of sub-groups in SYCL code to
improve the out-of-the-box experience for new developers, without preventing
experts and existing developers from requesting the existing compiler behavior.


== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_NAMED_SUB_GROUP_SIZES` to one of the values defined in the
table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to
determine if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test
the macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the
implementation supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not versioned, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===


=== Changes to sub-group behavior

Much of the behavior related to sub-groups in SYCL 2020 is
implementation-defined. Different kernels may use different sub-group sizes,
and even the same kernel may use different kernels on some devices (e.g. for
different ND-range launch configurations).

The extension introduces simpler behavior for sub-groups:

- If no sub-group size property appears on a kernel or `SYCL_EXTERNAL`
  function, the default behavior of an implementation must be to compile and
  execute the kernel or function using a device's _primary_ sub-group size. The
  primary sub-group size must be compatible with all core language features.

- If a developer does not require a stable sub-group size across all kernels
  and kernel launches, they can explicitly request an _automatic_ sub-group
  size chosen by the implementation.

- Implementations are free to provide mechanisms which override the default
  sub-group behavior (e.g. via compiler flags), but developers must use this
  mechanism explicitly in order to opt-in to any change in behavior.


=== Device queries

A new `info::device::primary_sub_group_size` device query is introduced to
query a device's primary sub-group size.

[%header,cols="1,5,5"]
|===
|Device Descriptor
|Return Type
|Description

|`info::device::primary_sub_group_size`
|`uint32_t`
|Return a sub-group size supported by this device that is guaranteed to support
 all core language features for the device.
|===


=== Properties

```c++
namespace sycl {
namespace ext {
namespace oneapi {
namespace experimental {

enum named_sub_group_size : uint32_t {
  primary = /* implementation-defined */,
  automatic = /* implementation-defined */,
};

inline constexpr sub_group_size_key::value_t<named_sub_group_size::primary> sub_group_size_primary;

inline constexpr sub_group_size_key::value_t<named_sub_group_size::automatic> sub_group_size_automatic;

} // namespace experimental
} // namespace oneapi
} // namespace ext
} // namespace sycl
```

NOTE: The named sub-group size properties are deliberately designed to reuse as
much of the existing `sub_group_size` property infrastructure as possible.
Implementations are free to choose the integral value associated with each
named sub-group type, but it is expected that many implementations will use
values like 0 (which is otherwise not a meaningful sub-group size) or -1
(which would otherwise correspond to a sub-group size so large it is unlikely
any device would support it).

|===
|Property|Description

|`sub_group_size_primary`
|The `sub_group_size_primary` property adds the requirement that the kernel
 must be compiled and executed with the primary sub-group size of the device to
 which the kernel is submitted (as reported by the
 `info::device::primary_sub_group_size` query).

|`sub_group_size_automatic`
|The `sub_group_size_automatic` property adds the requirement that the kernel
 can be compiled and executed with any of the valid sub-group sizes associated
 with the device to which the kernel is submitted (as reported by the
 `info::device::sub_group_sizes` query). The manner in which the sub-group size
 is selected is implementation-defined.

|===

At most one of the `sub_group_size`, `sub_group_size_primary` and
`sub_group_size_automatic` properties may be associated with a kernel or
device function.

NOTE: No special handling is required to detect this case, since
`sub_group_size_primary` and `sub_group_size_automatic` are simply named
shorthands for properties associated with `sub_group_size_key`.

There are special requirements whenever a device function defined in one
translation unit makes a call to a device function that is defined in a second
translation unit. In such a case, the second device function is always declared
using `SYCL_EXTERNAL`. If the kernel calling these device functions is defined
using a sub-group size property, the functions declared using `SYCL_EXTERNAL`
must be similarly decorated to ensure that the same sub-group size is used.
This decoration must exist in both the translation unit making the call and
also in the translation unit that defines the function. If the sub-group size
property is missing in the translation unit that makes the call, or if the
sub-group size of the called function does not match the sub-group size of the
calling function, the program is ill-formed and the compiler must raise a
diagnostic.

Note that a compiler may choose a different sub-group size for each kernel and
`SYCL_EXTERNAL` function using an automatic sub-group size. If kernels with an
automatic sub-group size call `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions using an automatic
sub-group size, the program may be ill-formed. The behavior when
`SYCL_EXTERNAL` is used in conjunction with an automatic sub-group size is
implementation-defined, and code relying on specific behavior should not be
expected to be portable across implementations. If a kernel calls a
`SYCL_EXTERNAL` function with an incompatible sub-group size, the compiler must
raise a diagnostic -- it is expected that this diagnostic will be raised during
link-time, since this is the first time the compiler will see both translation
units together.


=== DPC++ compiler flags

This non-normative section describes command line flags that the DPC++ compiler
supports. Other compilers are free to provide their own command line flags (if
any).

The `-fsycl-default-sub-group-size` flag controls the default sub-group size
used within a translation unit, which applies to all kernels and
`SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions without an explicitly specified sub-group size.

If the argument passed to `-fsycl-default-sub-group-size` is an integer `S`,
all kernels and `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions without an explicitly specified
sub-group size are compiled as-if `sub_group_size<S>` was specified as a
property of that kernel or function.

If the argument passed to `-fsycl-default-sub-group-size` is a string `NAME`,
all kernels and `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions without an explicitly specified
sub-group size are compiled as-if `sub_group_size_NAME` was
specified as a property of that kernel or function.


== Implementation notes

This non-normative section provides information about one possible
implementation of this extension.  It is not part of the specification of the
extension's API.

The existing mechanism of describing a required sub-group size in SPIR-V may
need to be augmented to support named sub-group sizes. The existing sub-group
size descriptors could be used with reserved values (similar to the template
arguments in the properties), or new descriptors could be created for each
case.

Device compilers will need to be taught to interpret these named sub-group
sizes as equivalent to a device-specific integral sub-group size at
compile-time.


== Issues

. What should the sub-group size compatible with all features be called?
+
--
*RESOLVED*: The name adopted is "primary", to convey that it is an integral
part of sub-group support provided by the device. Other names considered are
listed here for posterity: "default", "stable", "fixed", "core". These terms
are easy to misunderstand (i.e. the "default" size may not be chosen by
default, the "stable" size is unrelated to the software release cycle, the
"fixed" sub-group size may change between devices or compiler releases, the
"core" size is unrelated to hardware cores).
--

. How does sub-group size interact with `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions? The current
behavior requires exact matching. Should this be relaxed to allow alternative
implementations (e.g. link-time optimization, multi-versioning)?
+
--
*RESOLVED*: Exact matching is required to ensure that developers can reason about
the portability of their code across different implementations. Setting the
default sub-group size to "primary" and providing an override flag to select
"automatic" everywhere means that only advanced developers who are tuning
sub-group size on a per-kernel basis will have to worry about potential
matching issues.
--

Commit message:

Use correct status for "proposed" extension

sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_named_sub_group_sizes.asciidoc, after:

= sycl_ext_oneapi_named_sub_group_sizes

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}


== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2019-2022 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.


== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues


== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 4 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.

This extension also depends on the following other SYCL extensions:

* link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_properties]

* link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties]


== Status

This is a proposed extension specification, intended to gather community
feedback. Interfaces defined in this specification may not be implemented yet
or may be in a preliminary state. The specification itself may also change in
incompatible ways before it is finalized. Shipping software products should not
rely on APIs defined in this specification.


== Overview

SYCL provides a mechanism to set a required sub-group size for a kernel via
an attribute, and the sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties extension provides an
equivalent property.

Either mechanism is sufficient when tuning individual kernels for specific
devices, but their usage quickly becomes complicated in real-life scenarios
because:

1. An integral sub-group size must be provided at host compile-time.

2. The sub-group sizes supported by a device are not known until run-time.

3. It is common for the same sub-group size to be used for all kernels
   (e.g. because the sub-group size is reflected in data structures).

Applications wishing to write portable sub-group code that can target multiple
architectures must therefore multi-version their C++ code (e.g. via templates),
dispatch to the correct kernel(s) based on the result of a run-time query, and
repeat this process for every kernel individually.

This extension aims to simplify the process of using sub-groups by introducing
the notion of _named_ sub-group sizes, allowing developers to request a
sub-group size that meets certain requirements at host compile-time and
deferring the selection of a specific sub-group size until the kernel is
compiled for a specific device.

This extension also changes the default behavior of sub-groups in SYCL code to
improve the out-of-the-box experience for new developers, without preventing
experts and existing developers from requesting the existing compiler behavior.


== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_NAMED_SUB_GROUP_SIZES` to one of the values defined in the
table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to
determine if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test
the macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the
implementation supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not versioned, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===


=== Changes to sub-group behavior

Much of the behavior related to sub-groups in SYCL 2020 is
implementation-defined. Different kernels may use different sub-group sizes,
and even the same kernel may use different kernels on some devices (e.g. for
different ND-range launch configurations).

The extension introduces simpler behavior for sub-groups:

- If no sub-group size property appears on a kernel or `SYCL_EXTERNAL`
  function, the default behavior of an implementation must be to compile and
  execute the kernel or function using a device's _primary_ sub-group size. The
  primary sub-group size must be compatible with all core language features.

- If a developer does not require a stable sub-group size across all kernels
  and kernel launches, they can explicitly request an _automatic_ sub-group
  size chosen by the implementation.

- Implementations are free to provide mechanisms which override the default
  sub-group behavior (e.g. via compiler flags), but developers must use this
  mechanism explicitly in order to opt-in to any change in behavior.


=== Device queries

A new `info::device::primary_sub_group_size` device query is introduced to
query a device's primary sub-group size.

[%header,cols="1,5,5"]
|===
|Device Descriptor
|Return Type
|Description

|`info::device::primary_sub_group_size`
|`uint32_t`
|Return a sub-group size supported by this device that is guaranteed to support
 all core language features for the device.
|===


=== Properties

```c++
namespace sycl {
namespace ext {
namespace oneapi {
namespace experimental {

enum named_sub_group_size : uint32_t {
  primary = /* implementation-defined */,
  automatic = /* implementation-defined */,
};

inline constexpr sub_group_size_key::value_t<named_sub_group_size::primary> sub_group_size_primary;

inline constexpr sub_group_size_key::value_t<named_sub_group_size::automatic> sub_group_size_automatic;

} // namespace experimental
} // namespace oneapi
} // namespace ext
} // namespace sycl
```

NOTE: The named sub-group size properties are deliberately designed to reuse as
much of the existing `sub_group_size` property infrastructure as possible.
Implementations are free to choose the integral value associated with each
named sub-group type, but it is expected that many implementations will use
values like 0 (which is otherwise not a meaningful sub-group size) or -1
(which would otherwise correspond to a sub-group size so large it is unlikely
any device would support it).

|===
|Property|Description

|`sub_group_size_primary`
|The `sub_group_size_primary` property adds the requirement that the kernel
 must be compiled and executed with the primary sub-group size of the device to
 which the kernel is submitted (as reported by the
 `info::device::primary_sub_group_size` query).

|`sub_group_size_automatic`
|The `sub_group_size_automatic` property adds the requirement that the kernel
 can be compiled and executed with any of the valid sub-group sizes associated
 with the device to which the kernel is submitted (as reported by the
 `info::device::sub_group_sizes` query). The manner in which the sub-group size
 is selected is implementation-defined.

|===

At most one of the `sub_group_size`, `sub_group_size_primary` and
`sub_group_size_automatic` properties may be associated with a kernel or
device function.

NOTE: No special handling is required to detect this case, since
`sub_group_size_primary` and `sub_group_size_automatic` are simply named
shorthands for properties associated with `sub_group_size_key`.

There are special requirements whenever a device function defined in one
translation unit makes a call to a device function that is defined in a second
translation unit. In such a case, the second device function is always declared
using `SYCL_EXTERNAL`. If the kernel calling these device functions is defined
using a sub-group size property, the functions declared using `SYCL_EXTERNAL`
must be similarly decorated to ensure that the same sub-group size is used.
This decoration must exist in both the translation unit making the call and
also in the translation unit that defines the function. If the sub-group size
property is missing in the translation unit that makes the call, or if the
sub-group size of the called function does not match the sub-group size of the
calling function, the program is ill-formed and the compiler must raise a
diagnostic.

Note that a compiler may choose a different sub-group size for each kernel and
`SYCL_EXTERNAL` function using an automatic sub-group size. If kernels with an
automatic sub-group size call `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions using an automatic
sub-group size, the program may be ill-formed. The behavior when
`SYCL_EXTERNAL` is used in conjunction with an automatic sub-group size is
implementation-defined, and code relying on specific behavior should not be
expected to be portable across implementations. If a kernel calls a
`SYCL_EXTERNAL` function with an incompatible sub-group size, the compiler must
raise a diagnostic -- it is expected that this diagnostic will be raised during
link-time, since this is the first time the compiler will see both translation
units together.


=== DPC++ compiler flags

This non-normative section describes command line flags that the DPC++ compiler
supports. Other compilers are free to provide their own command line flags (if
any).

The `-fsycl-default-sub-group-size` flag controls the default sub-group size
used within a translation unit, which applies to all kernels and
`SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions without an explicitly specified sub-group size.

If the argument passed to `-fsycl-default-sub-group-size` is an integer `S`,
all kernels and `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions without an explicitly specified
sub-group size are compiled as-if `sub_group_size<S>` was specified as a
property of that kernel or function.

If the argument passed to `-fsycl-default-sub-group-size` is a string `NAME`,
all kernels and `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions without an explicitly specified
sub-group size are compiled as-if `sub_group_size_NAME` was
specified as a property of that kernel or function.


== Implementation notes

This non-normative section provides information about one possible
implementation of this extension.  It is not part of the specification of the
extension's API.

The existing mechanism of describing a required sub-group size in SPIR-V may
need to be augmented to support named sub-group sizes. The existing sub-group
size descriptors could be used with reserved values (similar to the template
arguments in the properties), or new descriptors could be created for each
case.

Device compilers will need to be taught to interpret these named sub-group
sizes as equivalent to a device-specific integral sub-group size at
compile-time.


== Issues

. What should the sub-group size compatible with all features be called?
+
--
*RESOLVED*: The name adopted is "primary", to convey that it is an integral
part of sub-group support provided by the device. Other names considered are
listed here for posterity: "default", "stable", "fixed", "core". These terms
are easy to misunderstand (i.e. the "default" size may not be chosen by
default, the "stable" size is unrelated to the software release cycle, the
"fixed" sub-group size may change between devices or compiler releases, the
"core" size is unrelated to hardware cores).
--

. How does sub-group size interact with `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions? The current
behavior requires exact matching. Should this be relaxed to allow alternative
implementations (e.g. link-time optimization, multi-versioning)?
+
--
*RESOLVED*: Exact matching is required to ensure that developers can reason about
the portability of their code across different implementations. Setting the
default sub-group size to "primary" and providing an override flag to select
"automatic" everywhere means that only advanced developers who are tuning
sub-group size on a per-kernel basis will have to worry about potential
matching issues.
--
