sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_execution_domain_info.asciidoc, before:

= sycl_ext_oneapi_execution_domain_info

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]
:endnote: &#8212;{nbsp}end{nbsp}note

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}


== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2024 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.


== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues


== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 9 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.


== Status

This is a proposed extension specification, intended to gather community
feedback.  Interfaces defined in this specification may not be implemented yet
or may be in a preliminary state.  The specification itself may also change in
incompatible ways before it is finalized.  *Shipping software products should
not rely on APIs defined in this specification.*


== Overview

SYCL 2020 allows developers to query the number of _compute units_ in a device,
where each compute unit describes a place where work-groups can execute.
However, the definition of compute unit is sufficiently vague that different
implementations and backends interpret it differently, which makes it difficult
for developers to use the number of compute units in a portable way.

This extension introduces the concept of an _execution domain_ and associated
device queries to SYCL in order to address this portability issue.
The definition of execution domain proposed here is intended to be more precise
than the definition of compute unit -- to provide users with certain guarantees
-- while remaining sufficiently abstract to describe multiple hardware
architectures.

The concepts described in this extension are advanced features that developers
can use to reason about work-item scheduling and device occupancy.
Most applications should not need to use this extension.


== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_EXECUTION_DOMAIN_INFO` to one of the values defined in
the table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to
determine if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test
the macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the
implementation supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|Initial version of this extension.
|===


=== Execution domains

A SYCL device can be viewed as a hierarchy of non-overlapping _execution
domains_, each associated with an _execution scope_.

Each execution domain represents a set of hardware resources that the SYCL
implementation uses to execute groups of SYCL work-items.
A given group of SYCL work-items with execution scope _S_ must execute in
exactly one execution domain associated with the same execution scope.
An implementation may execute multiple groups of SYCL work-items in a single
execution domain concurrently, as reflected by the return values of other
device queries (e.g., `max_num_sub_groups`).

The representation of specific hardware architectures in terms of execution
domains is tied to the execution model exposed by an implementation and is
thus implementation-defined.

[_Note_: Although the mapping is implementation-defined, code using execution
domains remains portable because implementations must choose a mapping that
is consistent with the definition of execution domains and the associated
queries.{endnote}]


=== Execution scopes

The `execution_scope` `enum` is used to represent the hierarchy of threads of
execution within a SYCL implementation.

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi {

enum class execution_scope {
  work_item,
  sub_group,
  work_group,
  root_group,
};

}
----

[_Note_: This `enum` is also defined by the `sycl_ext_oneapi_forward_progress`
extension.{endnote}]


=== Device queries

[source, c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::info::device {

temmplate <execution_scope ExecutionScope>
struct num_execution_domains;

}
----

[%header,cols="1,5,5"]
|===
|Device Descriptor
|Return Type
|Description

|`template <execution_scope ExecutionScope>
ext::oneapi::info::device::num_execution_domains`
|`size_t`
|Return the total number of execution domains associated with the execution
scope specified by the `ExecutionScope` template parameter.

|===


== Implementation in {dpcpp}

This section is non-normative and applies only to the {dpcpp} implementation.

The table below explains how {dpcpp} calculates the number of execution domains
for different combinations of device, backend, and execution scope.

[%header,cols="1,5,5,10"]
|===
|Device Type
|Backend(s)
|Execution Scope
|Number of Domains

|Any
|Any
|`root_group`
|1

|CPU
|OpenCL
|`work_group`
|Number of logical cores.

|CPU
|OpenCL
|`sub_group`
|Number of logical cores.

|CPU
|OpenCL
|`work_item`
|Number of logical cores * native SIMD width for 32-bit data types.

|Intel GPU
|Any
|`work_group`
|Number of Xe cores.

|Intel GPU
|Any
|`sub_group`
|Number of Xe cores * number of vector engines.

|Intel GPU
|Any
|`work_item`
|Number of Xe cores * number of vector engines * native SIMD width.

|NVIDIA GPU
|Any
|`work_group`
|Number of streaming multiprocessors (SMs).

|NVIDIA GPU
|Any
|`sub_group`
|Number of SMs * number of warp schedulers per SM.

|NVIDIA GPU
|Any
|`work_item`
|Number of FP32 CUDA cores.

|===

It is important to remember that the values returned by these queries reflect
hardware resources, and it is a user's responsibility to understand how to use
these numbers appropriately when choosing a launch configuration.


== Issues

None.

Commit message:

Expose concurrency separately to number of domains
Signed-off-by: John Pennycook <john.pennycook@intel.com>

sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_execution_domain_info.asciidoc, after:

= sycl_ext_oneapi_execution_domain_info

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]
:endnote: &#8212;{nbsp}end{nbsp}note

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}


== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2024 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.


== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues


== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 9 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.


== Status

This is a proposed extension specification, intended to gather community
feedback.  Interfaces defined in this specification may not be implemented yet
or may be in a preliminary state.  The specification itself may also change in
incompatible ways before it is finalized.  *Shipping software products should
not rely on APIs defined in this specification.*


== Overview

SYCL 2020 allows developers to query the number of _compute units_ in a device,
where each compute unit describes a place where work-groups can execute.
However, the definition of compute unit is sufficiently vague that different
implementations and backends interpret it differently, which makes it difficult
for developers to use the number of compute units in a portable way.

This extension introduces the concept of an _execution domain_ and associated
device queries to SYCL in order to address this portability issue.
The definition of execution domain proposed here is intended to be more precise
than the definition of compute unit -- to provide users with certain guarantees
-- while remaining sufficiently abstract to describe multiple hardware
architectures.

The concepts described in this extension are advanced features that developers
can use to reason about work-item scheduling and device occupancy.
Most applications should not need to use this extension.


== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_EXECUTION_DOMAIN_INFO` to one of the values defined in
the table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to
determine if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test
the macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the
implementation supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|Initial version of this extension.
|===


=== Execution domains

A SYCL device can be viewed as a hierarchy of non-overlapping _execution
domains_, each associated with an _execution scope_.

Each execution domain represents a set of hardware resources that the SYCL
implementation uses to execute groups of SYCL work-items.
A given group of SYCL work-items with execution scope _S_ must execute in
exactly one execution domain associated with the same execution scope.
An implementation may execute multiple groups of SYCL work-items in a single
execution domain concurrently, up to the amount of concurrency reported by
the device query.

The representation of specific hardware architectures in terms of execution
domains is tied to the execution model exposed by an implementation and is
thus implementation-defined.

[_Note_: Although the mapping is implementation-defined, code using execution
domains remains portable because implementations must choose a mapping that
is consistent with the definition of execution domains and the associated
queries.{endnote}]


=== Execution scopes

The `execution_scope` `enum` is used to represent the hierarchy of threads of
execution within a SYCL implementation.

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi {

enum class execution_scope {
  work_item,
  sub_group,
  work_group,
  root_group,
};

}
----

[_Note_: This `enum` is also defined by the `sycl_ext_oneapi_forward_progress`
extension.{endnote}]


=== Device queries

[source, c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::info::device {

temmplate <execution_scope ExecutionScope>
struct num_execution_domains;

template <execution_scope ExecutionScope>
struct max_concurrent_groups;

}
----

[%header,cols="1,5,5"]
|===
|Device Descriptor
|Return Type
|Description

|`template <execution_scope ExecutionScope>
ext::oneapi::info::device::num_execution_domains`
|`size_t`
|Return the total number of execution domains associated with the execution
scope specified by the `ExecutionScope` template parameter.

|`template <execution_scope ExecutionScope>
ext::oneapi::info::device::max_concurrent_groups`
|`size_t`
|Return the maximum number of concurrent groups that can be executed in each
execution domain associated with the execution scope specified by the
`ExecutionScope` template parameter.
The number of concurrent groups that can be executed for a specific kernel may
be less than this number, as reflected by the values returned by other
kernel-specific queries.

|===


== Implementation in {dpcpp}

This section is non-normative and applies only to the {dpcpp} implementation.

The table below explains how {dpcpp} calculates the number of execution domains
for different combinations of device, backend, and execution scope.

[%header,cols="1,5,5,10,10"]
|===
|Device Type
|Backend(s)
|Execution Scope
|Number of Domains
|Concurrency

|Any
|Any
|`root_group`
|1
|1

|CPU
|OpenCL
|`work_group`
|Number of logical cores.
|1

|CPU
|OpenCL
|`sub_group`
|Number of logical cores.
|1

|CPU
|OpenCL
|`work_item`
|Number of logical cores * native SIMD width for 32-bit data types.
|1

|Intel GPU
|Any
|`work_group`
|Number of Xe cores.
|Number of vector engines * number of hardware threads.

|Intel GPU
|Any
|`sub_group`
|Number of Xe cores * number of vector engines.
|Number of hardware threads.

|Intel GPU
|Any
|`work_item`
|Number of Xe cores * number of vector engines * number of hardware threads * 32.
|1

|NVIDIA GPU
|Any
|`work_group`
|Number of streaming multiprocessors (SMs).
|Number of blocks per SM.

|NVIDIA GPU
|Any
|`sub_group`
|Number of SMs * number of warp schedulers per SM.
|Maximum number of warps per warp scheduler.

|NVIDIA GPU
|Any
|`work_item`
|Number of SMs * maximum threads per SM.
|1

|===


== Issues

None.
