sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_forward_progress.asciidoc, before:

= sycl_ext_oneapi_forward_progress

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}


== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2022-2023 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.


== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues


== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 6 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.

This extension also depends on the following other SYCL extensions:

* link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties]
* link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_launch_queries.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_launch_queries]

[NOTE]
====
This extension uses the concept of a "root group" to represent the set of all
work-items in a kernel, in keeping with the
link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_root_group.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_root_group]
extension. However, there is no dependency on functionality introduced by that
extension.
====


== Status

This is a proposed extension specification, intended to gather community
feedback.  Interfaces defined in this specification may not be implemented yet
or may be in a preliminary state.  The specification itself may also change in
incompatible ways before it is finalized.  *Shipping software products should
not rely on APIs defined in this specification.*


== Overview

SYCL does not define any way to query the hardware and software mapping
selected by an implementation, and thus no way for application developers to
reason about forward progress guarantees. Developers must therefore choose
between writing highly performant code that makes unsafe assumptions and may
fail when moved to other implementations/backends/devices, or writing highly
portable code that does not make such assumptions but fails to take full
advantage of hardware capabilities.

This extension strengthens the forward progress guarantees provided by a SYCL
implementation, and exposes the guarantees of particular
implementations/backends/devices via new device queries and kernel properties.

Note that when the phrases below appear in this extension, their meaning is
identical to their meaning in the {cpp} core language specification:

- _Makes progress_
- _Thread of execution_
- _Concurrent forward progress guarantees_
- _Parallel forward progress guarantees_
- _Weakly parallel forward progress guarantees_
- _Block with forward progress guarantee delegation_


== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_FORWARD_PROGRESS` to one of the values defined in the
table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to
determine if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test
the macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the
implementation supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not versioned, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===


=== Execution model

The work-items in a SYCL ND-range kernel are arranged into a hierarchy of
groups and associated scopes. Work-items can query their position within each
group, and can coordinate with other members of the same group using group
functions and group algorithms.

The execution model for work-items in an ND-range kernel behaves as if the
work-items are invoked in the following hypothetical implementation:

- Execution of the entire ND-range kernel starts with a single root-group
thread of execution.
- The root-group thread of execution logically spawns one additional thread of
execution for each work-group, and blocks with forward progress guarantee
delegation upon those threads of execution.
- Each of the work-group threads of execution logically spawns one additional
thread of execution for each sub-group, and then the work-group thread of
execution blocks with forward progress guarantee delegation upon
those sub-group threads of execution.
- Each of the sub-group threads of execution logically spawns an additional
thread of execution for each work-item, and then the sub-group thread of
execution blocks with forward progress guarantee delegation upon those
work-item threads of execution.
- Finally, each work-item thread of execution executes one instance of the
kernel function.

```mermaid
graph TD;
    subgraph root-group
    root(Thread);
    end
    subgraph work-groups
    root-->wg1(Thread);
    root-->wg2(...);
    end
    subgraph sub-groups
    wg1-->sg1(Thread);
    wg1-->sg2(...);
    end
    subgraph work-items
    sg1-->wi1(Thread);
    sg1-->wi2(Thread);
    sg1-->wi3(Thread);
    sg1-->wi4(Thread);
    sg1-->wi5(Thread);
    sg1-->wi6(Thread);
    sg1-->wi7(Thread);
    sg1-->wi8(Thread);
    end
```

[NOTE]
====
Blocking with forward progress guarantee delegation ensures that the forward
progress guarantees provided by at least one thread of execution in a group
are at least as strong as the forward progress guarantees provided by that
group. However, it is unspecified which thread(s) of execution will be
strengthened and for how many steps.
====

Safe coordination of work-items via memory requires careful attention to this
hierarchy, since the ability of work-items to make progress depends on a
combination of the forward progress guarantees provided by the work-item
threads of execution and the forward progress guarantees provided by the
sub-group, work-group and root-group threads of execution. Often, correct
execution of a kernel requires knowledge of the forward progress guarantees
of a certain subset of these threads of execution. For example, kernels using
atomic operations to coordinate sub-groups in the same work-group only require
the threads of execution associated with sub-groups to provide concurrent or
parallel forward progress guarantees---there is no requirement for the
work-item, work-group or root-group threads of execution to provide any
specific forward progress guarantees.

To facilitate reasoning about work-item coordination, the forward progress
guarantees of threads of execution in SYCL can be qualified by a _coordination
scope_. This extension defines the following coordination scopes:

- All threads of execution spawned directly or indirectly from the ND-range
  kernel's initial root thread of execution are considered part of the same
  root-group scope.
- All threads of execution spawned directly or indirectly from the same
  work-group thread of execution are considered part of the same work-group
  scope.
- All threads of execution spawned from the same sub-group thread of execution
  are considered part of the same sub-group scope.
- Each individual work-item thread of execution is the sole member of its own
  work-item scope.

The forward progress guarantee of a thread of execution at scope `S`, relative
to coordination scope `C`, is the weakest of the forward progress guarantees
provided by threads of execution at all scopes between `S` and `C` inclusive.

[NOTE]
====
Qualifying a thread of execution's forward progress guarantees with a coordination
scope can be thought of as a shorthand for combining the forward progress
guarantees provided by each thread of execution in the hierarchy.

For example, consider a hypothetical implementation that creates a separate
`std::thread` (providing concurrent forward progress guarantees) to execute
each sub-group, but which permits an unbounded number of work-groups executed
as tasks (providing parallel forward progress guarantees). With work-group
coordination scope, each sub-group provides concurrent forward progress
guarantees: this reflects the guarantees associated with each `std::thread`
upon creation. With root-group coordination scope, each sub-group provides
only parallel forward progress guarantees: each sub-group's progress guarantees
are weakened to reflect that the creation of a sub-group depends upon a
specific work-group (task) being scheduled and making progress.
====

[NOTE]
====
Choosing a coordination scope is similar to choosing a memory scope for atomic
operations, in that it describes the potential set of threads of execution
that a thread _may_ attempt to coordinate with, and must be chosen to reflect
a kernel's dynamic communication pattern rather than static properties of its
source code.

For example, consider a kernel using locks/mutexes. Attempting to acquire a
lock is a blocking operation, and so if two threads of execution providing
weakly parallel forward progress guarantees attempt to acquire the lock
simultaneously this may result in a deadlock. To correctly avoid a deadlock,
the developer must correctly identify the coordination scope: if any work-item
may try to acquire the lock, then work-items require stronger forward progress
guarantees at root-group coordination scope; if each work-group has its own
private data structure(s), and only work-items within the same work-group may
try to acquire the same lock, then work-items require stronger forward progress
guarantees only at work-group coordination scope.

For performance reasons, a coordination scope will typically be the narrowest
scope containing all threads that may coordinate with one another.
====

=== Forward progress guarantees

The `forward_progress_guarantee` `enum` is used to represent the three classes
of forward progress guarantee defined in the {cpp} core language specification.

[source,c++]
----
namespace ext::oneapi::experimental::sycl {

enum class forward_progress_guarantee {
  concurrent,
  parallel,
  weakly_parallel
};

}
----

[NOTE]
====
This `enum` is defined similarly to the one defined in
https://wg21.link/p2300[P2300: `std::execution`].
====


=== Execution scopes

The `execution_scope` `enum` is used to represent the hierarchy of threads of
execution within a SYCL implementation.

[source,c++]
----
namespace ext::oneapi::experimental::sycl {

enum class execution_scope {
  work_item,
  sub_group,
  work_group,
  root_group,
};

}
----

[NOTE]
====
The existing `memory_scope` `enum` is not used here to provide greater
flexibility in modifying the forward progress extension in future.
`memory_scope` is lacking values required by this extension (i.e. `root_group`)
and has additional values that are not required here (e.g. `system`).
====


=== Device queries

New device queries are introduced to allow developers to reason about the
progress guarantees that can be provided by each device.

The results of these queries represent the forward progress guarantees that a
device can satisfy for each execution scope, and therefore the forward progress
guarantees that can be requested by a kernel's <<properties,
properties>>. These queries (and their results) must be interpreted relative to
a coordination scope, as described previously.

[NOTE]
====
Note that these queries cannot be used to reason about the thread of execution
associated with the root-group, because it is currently the top of the
hierarchy and it is therefore not possible to specify a broader coordination
scope.
====

[NOTE]
====
Explicitly specifying the coordination scope ensures that the interpretation of
forward progress queries is fixed and independent of the number of execution
scopes in the hierarchy. This extension therefore does not prevent SYCL or
other extensions from introducing new execution scopes.
====


[%header,cols="1,5,5"]
|===
|Device Descriptor
|Return Type
|Description

|`template <execution_scope CoordinationScope>
 ext::oneapi::info::device::work_group_progress_capabilities`
|`std::vector<forward_progress_guarantee>`
|Return the set of forward progress guarantees that can be requested by
 the `work_group_progress` kernel property, for the specified value of
 `CoordinationScope`. Specializations of
 `ext_oneapi_work_group_progress_capabilities` are only available for
 `execution_scope::root_group`.

|`template <execution_scope CoordinationScope>
 ext::oneapi::info::device::sub_group_progress_capabilities`
|`std::vector<forward_progress_guarantee>`
|Return the set of forward progress guarantees that can be requested by
 the `sub_group_progress` kernel property, for the specified value of
 `CoordinationScope`. Specializations of
 `ext_oneapi_sub_group_progress_capabilities` are only available for
 `execution_scope::root_group` and `execution_scope::work_group`.

|`template <execution_scope CoordinationScope>
 ext::oneapi::info::device::work_item_progress_capabilities`
|`std::vector<forward_progress_guarantee>`
|Return the set of forward progress guarantees that can be requested by
 the `work_item_progress` kernel property, for the specified value of
 `CoordinationScope`. Specializations of
 `ext_oneapi_work_item_progress_capabilities` are only available for
 `execution_scope::root_group`, `execution_scope::work_group`, and
 `execution_scope::sub_group`.

|===


=== Kernel properties [[properties]]

New kernel properties are introduced to allow developers to declare that a
given kernel requires specific forward progress guarantees for correctness.
If a kernel is submitted to a device that cannot satisfy the request for
specific progress guarantees, the implementation must throw an `exception`
with the `errc::feature_not_supported` error code.

Each property must appear in a property list at most once, and it is therefore
not possible to specify different guarantees and/or coordination scopes for the
same execution scope directly. However, it remains possible for requests with
different execution scopes to have overlapping coordination scopes
(e.g. a request for work-items to provide concurrent forward progress
guarantees at root-group coordination scope implicitly requests for sub-groups
and work-groups to also provide concurrent forward progress guarantees). In
such a case, an implementation must satisfy the strongest request(s).

Devices may not be able to provide the requested forward progress guarantees
for all launch configurations.  The <<launch, launch queries>> defined in a
later section allow developers to identify valid launch configurations for
specific combinations of properties.

[NOTE]
====
The mechanism used to provide specific forward progress guarantees is
implementation-defined.
====

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

struct work_group_progress_key {
  template <forward_progress_guarantee Guarantee, execution_scope CoordinationScope>
  using value_t = property_value<work_group_progress_key, std::integral_constant<forward_progress_guarantee, Guarantee>, std::integral_constant<execution_scope, CoordinationScope>>;
};

struct sub_group_progress_key {
  template <forward_progress_guarantee Guarantee, execution_scope CoordinationScope>
  using value_t = property_value<sub_group_progress_key, std::integral_constant<forward_progress_guarantee, Guarantee>, std::integral_constant<execution_scope, CoordinationScope>>;
};

struct work_item_progress_key {
  template <forward_progress_guarantee Guarantee, execution_scope CoordinationScope>
  using value_t = property_value<work_item_progress_key, std::integral_constant<forward_progress_guarantee, Guarantee>, std::integral_constant<execution_scope, CoordinationScope>>;
};

template <forward_progress_guarantee Guarantee, execution_scope CoordinationScope>
inline constexpr work_group_progress_key::value_t<Guarantee, CoordinationScope> work_group_progress;

template <forward_progress_guarantee Guarantee, execution_scope CoordinationScope>
inline constexpr sub_group_progress_key::value_t<Guarantee, CoordinationScope> sub_group_progress;

template <forward_progress_guarantee Guarantee, execution_scope CoordinationScope>
inline constexpr work_item_progress_key::value_t<Guarantee, CoordinationScope> work_item_progress;

template <> struct is_property_key<work_group_progress_key> : std::true_type {};
template <> struct is_property_key<sub_group_progress_key> : std::true_type {};
template <> struct is_property_key<work_item_progress_key> : std::true_type {};

}
----

|===
|Property|Description

|`work_group_progress`
|The `work_group_progress` property adds the requirement that the kernel must be
 launched with the specified forward progress guarantees for threads of execution
 created at `execution_scope::work_group` scope, with the specified
 coordination scope. `CoordinationScope` must be broader than
 `execution_scope::work_group`.

|`sub_group_progress`
|The `sub_group_progress` property adds the requirement that the kernel must be
 launched with the specified forward progress guarantees for threads of execution
 created at `execution_scope::sub_group` scope, with the specified coordination
 scope. `CoordinationScope` must be broader than `execution_scope::sub_group`.

|`work_item_progress`
|The `work_item_progress` property adds the requirement that the kernel must be
 launched with the specified forward progress guarantees for threads of execution
 created at `execution_scope::work_item` scope, with the specified coordination
 scope. `CoordinationScope` must be broader than `execution_scope::work_item`.

|===


== Implementation notes

This non-normative section provides information about one possible
implementation of this extension.  It is not part of the specification of the
extension's API.

The simplest valid implementation of this extension returns `weakly_parallel`
for all queries, and throws an exception upon submission for any kernel
requesting stronger guarantees.  Such an implementation is compatible with
any backend currently capable of supporting SYCL 2020.

Exposing stronger guarantees requires an understanding of both a device's
capabilities and the functionality exposed by specific backends. For example,
it may only be possible to provide `concurrent` forward progress guarantees
for backends that submit kernels eagerly and which support some notion of a
"cooperative" kernel launch.

The table below shows the expected mapping for CPUs and GPUs using the current
OpenCL and Level Zero backends, respectively.

[%header,cols="1,5,5,5"]
|===
|Scope
|Coordination Scope
|CPU & OpenCL
|GPU & Level Zero

|`work_group`
|`root_group`
|`parallel`
|`concurrent`

|`sub_group`
|`work_group`
|`weakly_parallel`
|`concurrent`

|`work_item`
|`sub_group`
|`weakly_parallel`
|`weakly_parallel`

|===

== Issues

None.

Commit message:

[SYCL][Doc] Fix broken link in forward_progress
sycl_ext_oneapi_launch_queries was originally part of
sycl_ext_oneapi_forward_progress. When we split things into two extensions, we
forgot to update one of the links.

Signed-off-by: John Pennycook <john.pennycook@intel.com>

sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_forward_progress.asciidoc, after:

= sycl_ext_oneapi_forward_progress

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}


== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2022-2024 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.


== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues


== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 6 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.

This extension also depends on the following other SYCL extensions:

* link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties]
* link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_launch_queries.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_launch_queries]

[NOTE]
====
This extension uses the concept of a "root group" to represent the set of all
work-items in a kernel, in keeping with the
link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_root_group.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_root_group]
extension. However, there is no dependency on functionality introduced by that
extension.
====


== Status

This is a proposed extension specification, intended to gather community
feedback.  Interfaces defined in this specification may not be implemented yet
or may be in a preliminary state.  The specification itself may also change in
incompatible ways before it is finalized.  *Shipping software products should
not rely on APIs defined in this specification.*


== Overview

SYCL does not define any way to query the hardware and software mapping
selected by an implementation, and thus no way for application developers to
reason about forward progress guarantees. Developers must therefore choose
between writing highly performant code that makes unsafe assumptions and may
fail when moved to other implementations/backends/devices, or writing highly
portable code that does not make such assumptions but fails to take full
advantage of hardware capabilities.

This extension strengthens the forward progress guarantees provided by a SYCL
implementation, and exposes the guarantees of particular
implementations/backends/devices via new device queries and kernel properties.

Note that when the phrases below appear in this extension, their meaning is
identical to their meaning in the {cpp} core language specification:

- _Makes progress_
- _Thread of execution_
- _Concurrent forward progress guarantees_
- _Parallel forward progress guarantees_
- _Weakly parallel forward progress guarantees_
- _Block with forward progress guarantee delegation_


== Specification

=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_FORWARD_PROGRESS` to one of the values defined in the
table below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to
determine if the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test
the macro's value to determine which of the extension's features the
implementation supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not versioned, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===


=== Execution model

The work-items in a SYCL ND-range kernel are arranged into a hierarchy of
groups and associated scopes. Work-items can query their position within each
group, and can coordinate with other members of the same group using group
functions and group algorithms.

The execution model for work-items in an ND-range kernel behaves as if the
work-items are invoked in the following hypothetical implementation:

- Execution of the entire ND-range kernel starts with a single root-group
thread of execution.
- The root-group thread of execution logically spawns one additional thread of
execution for each work-group, and blocks with forward progress guarantee
delegation upon those threads of execution.
- Each of the work-group threads of execution logically spawns one additional
thread of execution for each sub-group, and then the work-group thread of
execution blocks with forward progress guarantee delegation upon
those sub-group threads of execution.
- Each of the sub-group threads of execution logically spawns an additional
thread of execution for each work-item, and then the sub-group thread of
execution blocks with forward progress guarantee delegation upon those
work-item threads of execution.
- Finally, each work-item thread of execution executes one instance of the
kernel function.

```mermaid
graph TD;
    subgraph root-group
    root(Thread);
    end
    subgraph work-groups
    root-->wg1(Thread);
    root-->wg2(...);
    end
    subgraph sub-groups
    wg1-->sg1(Thread);
    wg1-->sg2(...);
    end
    subgraph work-items
    sg1-->wi1(Thread);
    sg1-->wi2(Thread);
    sg1-->wi3(Thread);
    sg1-->wi4(Thread);
    sg1-->wi5(Thread);
    sg1-->wi6(Thread);
    sg1-->wi7(Thread);
    sg1-->wi8(Thread);
    end
```

[NOTE]
====
Blocking with forward progress guarantee delegation ensures that the forward
progress guarantees provided by at least one thread of execution in a group
are at least as strong as the forward progress guarantees provided by that
group. However, it is unspecified which thread(s) of execution will be
strengthened and for how many steps.
====

Safe coordination of work-items via memory requires careful attention to this
hierarchy, since the ability of work-items to make progress depends on a
combination of the forward progress guarantees provided by the work-item
threads of execution and the forward progress guarantees provided by the
sub-group, work-group and root-group threads of execution. Often, correct
execution of a kernel requires knowledge of the forward progress guarantees
of a certain subset of these threads of execution. For example, kernels using
atomic operations to coordinate sub-groups in the same work-group only require
the threads of execution associated with sub-groups to provide concurrent or
parallel forward progress guarantees---there is no requirement for the
work-item, work-group or root-group threads of execution to provide any
specific forward progress guarantees.

To facilitate reasoning about work-item coordination, the forward progress
guarantees of threads of execution in SYCL can be qualified by a _coordination
scope_. This extension defines the following coordination scopes:

- All threads of execution spawned directly or indirectly from the ND-range
  kernel's initial root thread of execution are considered part of the same
  root-group scope.
- All threads of execution spawned directly or indirectly from the same
  work-group thread of execution are considered part of the same work-group
  scope.
- All threads of execution spawned from the same sub-group thread of execution
  are considered part of the same sub-group scope.
- Each individual work-item thread of execution is the sole member of its own
  work-item scope.

The forward progress guarantee of a thread of execution at scope `S`, relative
to coordination scope `C`, is the weakest of the forward progress guarantees
provided by threads of execution at all scopes between `S` and `C` inclusive.

[NOTE]
====
Qualifying a thread of execution's forward progress guarantees with a coordination
scope can be thought of as a shorthand for combining the forward progress
guarantees provided by each thread of execution in the hierarchy.

For example, consider a hypothetical implementation that creates a separate
`std::thread` (providing concurrent forward progress guarantees) to execute
each sub-group, but which permits an unbounded number of work-groups executed
as tasks (providing parallel forward progress guarantees). With work-group
coordination scope, each sub-group provides concurrent forward progress
guarantees: this reflects the guarantees associated with each `std::thread`
upon creation. With root-group coordination scope, each sub-group provides
only parallel forward progress guarantees: each sub-group's progress guarantees
are weakened to reflect that the creation of a sub-group depends upon a
specific work-group (task) being scheduled and making progress.
====

[NOTE]
====
Choosing a coordination scope is similar to choosing a memory scope for atomic
operations, in that it describes the potential set of threads of execution
that a thread _may_ attempt to coordinate with, and must be chosen to reflect
a kernel's dynamic communication pattern rather than static properties of its
source code.

For example, consider a kernel using locks/mutexes. Attempting to acquire a
lock is a blocking operation, and so if two threads of execution providing
weakly parallel forward progress guarantees attempt to acquire the lock
simultaneously this may result in a deadlock. To correctly avoid a deadlock,
the developer must correctly identify the coordination scope: if any work-item
may try to acquire the lock, then work-items require stronger forward progress
guarantees at root-group coordination scope; if each work-group has its own
private data structure(s), and only work-items within the same work-group may
try to acquire the same lock, then work-items require stronger forward progress
guarantees only at work-group coordination scope.

For performance reasons, a coordination scope will typically be the narrowest
scope containing all threads that may coordinate with one another.
====

=== Forward progress guarantees

The `forward_progress_guarantee` `enum` is used to represent the three classes
of forward progress guarantee defined in the {cpp} core language specification.

[source,c++]
----
namespace ext::oneapi::experimental::sycl {

enum class forward_progress_guarantee {
  concurrent,
  parallel,
  weakly_parallel
};

}
----

[NOTE]
====
This `enum` is defined similarly to the one defined in
https://wg21.link/p2300[P2300: `std::execution`].
====


=== Execution scopes

The `execution_scope` `enum` is used to represent the hierarchy of threads of
execution within a SYCL implementation.

[source,c++]
----
namespace ext::oneapi::experimental::sycl {

enum class execution_scope {
  work_item,
  sub_group,
  work_group,
  root_group,
};

}
----

[NOTE]
====
The existing `memory_scope` `enum` is not used here to provide greater
flexibility in modifying the forward progress extension in future.
`memory_scope` is lacking values required by this extension (i.e. `root_group`)
and has additional values that are not required here (e.g. `system`).
====


=== Device queries

New device queries are introduced to allow developers to reason about the
progress guarantees that can be provided by each device.

The results of these queries represent the forward progress guarantees that a
device can satisfy for each execution scope, and therefore the forward progress
guarantees that can be requested by a kernel's <<properties,
properties>>. These queries (and their results) must be interpreted relative to
a coordination scope, as described previously.

[NOTE]
====
Note that these queries cannot be used to reason about the thread of execution
associated with the root-group, because it is currently the top of the
hierarchy and it is therefore not possible to specify a broader coordination
scope.
====

[NOTE]
====
Explicitly specifying the coordination scope ensures that the interpretation of
forward progress queries is fixed and independent of the number of execution
scopes in the hierarchy. This extension therefore does not prevent SYCL or
other extensions from introducing new execution scopes.
====


[%header,cols="1,5,5"]
|===
|Device Descriptor
|Return Type
|Description

|`template <execution_scope CoordinationScope>
 ext::oneapi::info::device::work_group_progress_capabilities`
|`std::vector<forward_progress_guarantee>`
|Return the set of forward progress guarantees that can be requested by
 the `work_group_progress` kernel property, for the specified value of
 `CoordinationScope`. Specializations of
 `ext_oneapi_work_group_progress_capabilities` are only available for
 `execution_scope::root_group`.

|`template <execution_scope CoordinationScope>
 ext::oneapi::info::device::sub_group_progress_capabilities`
|`std::vector<forward_progress_guarantee>`
|Return the set of forward progress guarantees that can be requested by
 the `sub_group_progress` kernel property, for the specified value of
 `CoordinationScope`. Specializations of
 `ext_oneapi_sub_group_progress_capabilities` are only available for
 `execution_scope::root_group` and `execution_scope::work_group`.

|`template <execution_scope CoordinationScope>
 ext::oneapi::info::device::work_item_progress_capabilities`
|`std::vector<forward_progress_guarantee>`
|Return the set of forward progress guarantees that can be requested by
 the `work_item_progress` kernel property, for the specified value of
 `CoordinationScope`. Specializations of
 `ext_oneapi_work_item_progress_capabilities` are only available for
 `execution_scope::root_group`, `execution_scope::work_group`, and
 `execution_scope::sub_group`.

|===


=== Kernel properties [[properties]]

New kernel properties are introduced to allow developers to declare that a
given kernel requires specific forward progress guarantees for correctness.
If a kernel is submitted to a device that cannot satisfy the request for
specific progress guarantees, the implementation must throw an `exception`
with the `errc::feature_not_supported` error code.

Each property must appear in a property list at most once, and it is therefore
not possible to specify different guarantees and/or coordination scopes for the
same execution scope directly. However, it remains possible for requests with
different execution scopes to have overlapping coordination scopes
(e.g. a request for work-items to provide concurrent forward progress
guarantees at root-group coordination scope implicitly requests for sub-groups
and work-groups to also provide concurrent forward progress guarantees). In
such a case, an implementation must satisfy the strongest request(s).

Devices may not be able to provide the requested forward progress guarantees
for all launch configurations. Developers should use the launch queries defined
by the
link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_launch_queries.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_launch_queries]
extension to identify valid launch configurations for specific combinations of
properties.

[NOTE]
====
The mechanism used to provide specific forward progress guarantees is
implementation-defined.
====

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

struct work_group_progress_key {
  template <forward_progress_guarantee Guarantee, execution_scope CoordinationScope>
  using value_t = property_value<work_group_progress_key, std::integral_constant<forward_progress_guarantee, Guarantee>, std::integral_constant<execution_scope, CoordinationScope>>;
};

struct sub_group_progress_key {
  template <forward_progress_guarantee Guarantee, execution_scope CoordinationScope>
  using value_t = property_value<sub_group_progress_key, std::integral_constant<forward_progress_guarantee, Guarantee>, std::integral_constant<execution_scope, CoordinationScope>>;
};

struct work_item_progress_key {
  template <forward_progress_guarantee Guarantee, execution_scope CoordinationScope>
  using value_t = property_value<work_item_progress_key, std::integral_constant<forward_progress_guarantee, Guarantee>, std::integral_constant<execution_scope, CoordinationScope>>;
};

template <forward_progress_guarantee Guarantee, execution_scope CoordinationScope>
inline constexpr work_group_progress_key::value_t<Guarantee, CoordinationScope> work_group_progress;

template <forward_progress_guarantee Guarantee, execution_scope CoordinationScope>
inline constexpr sub_group_progress_key::value_t<Guarantee, CoordinationScope> sub_group_progress;

template <forward_progress_guarantee Guarantee, execution_scope CoordinationScope>
inline constexpr work_item_progress_key::value_t<Guarantee, CoordinationScope> work_item_progress;

template <> struct is_property_key<work_group_progress_key> : std::true_type {};
template <> struct is_property_key<sub_group_progress_key> : std::true_type {};
template <> struct is_property_key<work_item_progress_key> : std::true_type {};

}
----

|===
|Property|Description

|`work_group_progress`
|The `work_group_progress` property adds the requirement that the kernel must be
 launched with the specified forward progress guarantees for threads of execution
 created at `execution_scope::work_group` scope, with the specified
 coordination scope. `CoordinationScope` must be broader than
 `execution_scope::work_group`.

|`sub_group_progress`
|The `sub_group_progress` property adds the requirement that the kernel must be
 launched with the specified forward progress guarantees for threads of execution
 created at `execution_scope::sub_group` scope, with the specified coordination
 scope. `CoordinationScope` must be broader than `execution_scope::sub_group`.

|`work_item_progress`
|The `work_item_progress` property adds the requirement that the kernel must be
 launched with the specified forward progress guarantees for threads of execution
 created at `execution_scope::work_item` scope, with the specified coordination
 scope. `CoordinationScope` must be broader than `execution_scope::work_item`.

|===


== Implementation notes

This non-normative section provides information about one possible
implementation of this extension.  It is not part of the specification of the
extension's API.

The simplest valid implementation of this extension returns `weakly_parallel`
for all queries, and throws an exception upon submission for any kernel
requesting stronger guarantees.  Such an implementation is compatible with
any backend currently capable of supporting SYCL 2020.

Exposing stronger guarantees requires an understanding of both a device's
capabilities and the functionality exposed by specific backends. For example,
it may only be possible to provide `concurrent` forward progress guarantees
for backends that submit kernels eagerly and which support some notion of a
"cooperative" kernel launch.

The table below shows the expected mapping for CPUs and GPUs using the current
OpenCL and Level Zero backends, respectively.

[%header,cols="1,5,5,5"]
|===
|Scope
|Coordination Scope
|CPU & OpenCL
|GPU & Level Zero

|`work_group`
|`root_group`
|`parallel`
|`concurrent`

|`sub_group`
|`work_group`
|`weakly_parallel`
|`concurrent`

|`work_item`
|`sub_group`
|`weakly_parallel`
|`weakly_parallel`

|===

== Issues

None.
