sycl/doc/index.rst, before:

Data Parallel C++ Documentation
===============================

Using oneAPI DPC++ for Application Development
----------------------------------------------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   GetStartedGuide
   Getting Started (Japanese) <https://www.isus.jp/others/get-started-with-oneapi-dpc/>
   UsersManual
   PreprocessorMacros
   cuda/contents
   Extensions <https://github.com/intel/llvm/tree/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions>
   FAQ
   User API Reference <https://intel.github.io/llvm-docs/doxygen/group__sycl__api.html>
   EnvironmentVariables
   MultiTileCardWithLevelZero

Developing oneAPI DPC++ Compiler
--------------------------------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   API Reference <https://intel.github.io/llvm-docs/doxygen>
   Clang Documentation <https://intel.github.io/llvm-docs/clang>
   Clang API Reference <https://intel.github.io/llvm-docs/clang_doxygen>
   design/CompilerAndRuntimeDesign
   design/KernelParameterPassing
   design/PluginInterface
   design/SpecializationConstants
   design/KernelProgramCache
   design/GlobalObjectsInRuntime
   design/LinkedAllocations
   design/Assert
   design/SharedLibraries
   design/OptionalDeviceFeatures
   design/SYCLInstrumentationUsingXPTI
   design/ITTAnnotations
   design/DeviceGlobal
   design/CompileTimeProperties

Development BKMs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   developer/DockerBKMs
   developer/ABIPolicyGuide

Commit message:

Update titles in Sphinx documentation

sycl/doc/index.rst, after:

Data Parallel C++ Documentation
===============================

Using oneAPI DPC++ for Application Development
----------------------------------------------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   GetStartedGuide
   Getting Started (Japanese) <https://www.isus.jp/others/get-started-with-oneapi-dpc/>
   UsersManual
   PreprocessorMacros
   cuda/contents
   Extensions <https://github.com/intel/llvm/tree/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions>
   FAQ
   User API Reference <https://intel.github.io/llvm-docs/doxygen/group__sycl__api.html>
   EnvironmentVariables
   MultiTileCardWithLevelZero

Design Documents for the oneAPI DPC++ Compiler
----------------------------------------------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   API Reference <https://intel.github.io/llvm-docs/doxygen>
   Clang Documentation <https://intel.github.io/llvm-docs/clang>
   Clang API Reference <https://intel.github.io/llvm-docs/clang_doxygen>
   design/CompilerAndRuntimeDesign
   design/KernelParameterPassing
   design/PluginInterface
   design/SpecializationConstants
   design/KernelProgramCache
   design/GlobalObjectsInRuntime
   design/LinkedAllocations
   design/Assert
   design/SharedLibraries
   design/OptionalDeviceFeatures
   design/SYCLInstrumentationUsingXPTI
   design/ITTAnnotations
   design/DeviceGlobal
   design/CompileTimeProperties

Developer Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   developer/DockerBKMs
   developer/ABIPolicyGuide
