sycl/doc/PreprocessorMacros.md, before:

# Preprocessor Macros 

This file describes macros that have effect on SYCL compiler and run-time.

- **RESTRICT_WRITE_ACCESS_TO_CONSTANT_PTR**

  The spec assumes that the SYCL implementation does address space deduction.
  However, for our implementation, the deduction is performed in the middle end,
  where it's hard to provide user friendly diagnositcs.
  Due to these problems writing to raw pointers obtained from `constant_ptr` is
  not diagnosed now.
  The user can enable diagnostics upon writing to such pointers via enabling the
  `RESTRICT_WRITE_ACCESS_TO_CONSTANT_PTR` macro.
  This allows `constant_ptr` to use constant pointers as underlying
  pointer types. Thus, conversions from `constant_ptr` to raw pointers will return
  constant pointers and writing to const pointers will be diagnosed by the
  front-end.
  This behavior is not following the SYCL spec since `constant_ptr` conversions to
  the underlying pointer types return pointers without any additional qualifiers
  so it's disabled by default.

- **DISABLE_SYCL_INSTRUMENTATION_METADATA**

  This macro is used to disable passing of code location information to public
  methods.

- **SYCL2020_DISABLE_DEPRECATION_WARNINGS**

  Disables warnings coming from usage of SYCL 1.2.1 APIs, that are deprecated in
  SYCL 2020.

- **SYCL_DISABLE_DEPRECATION_WARNINGS**

  Disables all deprecation warnings in SYCL runtime headers, including SYCL
  1.2.1 deprecations.

- **SYCL_DISABLE_CPP_VERSION_CHECK_WARNING**

  Disables a message which warns about unsupported C++ version.

- **SYCL_DISABLE_FALLBACK_ASSERT**

  Defining this macro eliminates some overhead that is associated with
  submitting kernels that call `assert()`. When this macro is defined, the logic
  for detecting assertion failures in kernels is disabled, so a failed assert
  will not cause a message to be printed and will not cause the program to
  abort. However, this macro only affects kernels that are submitted to devices
  that do **not** have native support for `assert()` because devices with native
  support do not impose any extra overhead. One can check to see if a device has
  native support for `assert()` via `aspect::ext_oneapi_native_assert`.

- **SYCL2020_CONFORMANT_APIS**
  This macro is used to comply with the SYCL 2020 specification, as some of the current 
  implementations may be widespread and not conform to it.
  Description of what it changes:
  1) According to spec, `backend_return_t` for opencl event 
  should be `std::vector<cl_event>` instead of `cl_event`. Defining this macro 
  will change the behavior of `sycl::get_native()` function and using types for 
  next structs: `interop<backend::opencl, event>`, `BackendInput<backend::opencl, event>`, 
  `BackendReturn<backend::opencl, event>` to be in line with the spec.

## Version macros

- `__LIBSYCL_MAJOR_VERSION` is set to SYCL runtime library major version.
- `__LIBSYCL_MINOR_VERSION` is set to SYCL runtime library minor version.
- `__LIBSYCL_PATCH_VERSION` is set to SYCL runtime library patch version.

Commit message:

[SYCL] Disable fallback assert by default (#4694)
Due excessive amount of issues submitted against fallback assert implementation the fallback assert is now disabled by default until fixed.

sycl/doc/PreprocessorMacros.md, after:

# Preprocessor Macros 

This file describes macros that have effect on SYCL compiler and run-time.

- **RESTRICT_WRITE_ACCESS_TO_CONSTANT_PTR**

  The spec assumes that the SYCL implementation does address space deduction.
  However, for our implementation, the deduction is performed in the middle end,
  where it's hard to provide user friendly diagnositcs.
  Due to these problems writing to raw pointers obtained from `constant_ptr` is
  not diagnosed now.
  The user can enable diagnostics upon writing to such pointers via enabling the
  `RESTRICT_WRITE_ACCESS_TO_CONSTANT_PTR` macro.
  This allows `constant_ptr` to use constant pointers as underlying
  pointer types. Thus, conversions from `constant_ptr` to raw pointers will return
  constant pointers and writing to const pointers will be diagnosed by the
  front-end.
  This behavior is not following the SYCL spec since `constant_ptr` conversions to
  the underlying pointer types return pointers without any additional qualifiers
  so it's disabled by default.

- **DISABLE_SYCL_INSTRUMENTATION_METADATA**

  This macro is used to disable passing of code location information to public
  methods.

- **SYCL2020_DISABLE_DEPRECATION_WARNINGS**

  Disables warnings coming from usage of SYCL 1.2.1 APIs, that are deprecated in
  SYCL 2020.

- **SYCL_DISABLE_DEPRECATION_WARNINGS**

  Disables all deprecation warnings in SYCL runtime headers, including SYCL
  1.2.1 deprecations.

- **SYCL_DISABLE_CPP_VERSION_CHECK_WARNING**

  Disables a message which warns about unsupported C++ version.

- **SYCL_FALLBACK_ASSERT**

  Defining as non-zero enables the fallback assert feature even on devices
  without native support. Be aware that this will add some overhead that is
  associated with submitting kernels that call `assert()`. When this macro is
  defined as 0 or is not defined, the logic for detecting assertion failures in kernels is
  disabled, so a failed assert will not cause a message to be printed and will
  not cause the program to abort. Some devices have native support for
  assertions. The logic for detecting assertion failures is always enabled on
  these devices regardless of whether this macro is defined because that logic
  does not add any extra overhead. One can check to see if a device has native
  support for `assert()` via `aspect::ext_oneapi_native_assert`.
  This macro is undefined by default.

- **SYCL2020_CONFORMANT_APIS**
  This macro is used to comply with the SYCL 2020 specification, as some of the current 
  implementations may be widespread and not conform to it.
  Description of what it changes:
  1) According to spec, `backend_return_t` for opencl event 
  should be `std::vector<cl_event>` instead of `cl_event`. Defining this macro 
  will change the behavior of `sycl::get_native()` function and using types for 
  next structs: `interop<backend::opencl, event>`, `BackendInput<backend::opencl, event>`, 
  `BackendReturn<backend::opencl, event>` to be in line with the spec.

## Version macros

- `__LIBSYCL_MAJOR_VERSION` is set to SYCL runtime library major version.
- `__LIBSYCL_MINOR_VERSION` is set to SYCL runtime library minor version.
- `__LIBSYCL_PATCH_VERSION` is set to SYCL runtime library patch version.
