# SYCL Instrumentation

Any language or programming paradigm must provide mechanisms to correlate a
developer's use of the language to the debug and performance traces for that
use. A lightweight tracing framework (XPTI) was developed to enable this for
SYCL and is the primary mechanism that is employed to enable debug and
performance traces.

> **NOTE:** For additional information on the XPTI framework, please refer to
>the [Framework Documentation](https://github.com/intel/llvm/tree/sycl/xptifw/doc/XPTI_Framework.md) for API use
>and framework performance data.

This document outlines the use of this framework API in the SYCL runtime
library. The primary concept enable by this framework is the generation of a
unique 64-bit ID, referred to as the Universal ID (UID), for every public
language entry point into the library. This allows tools and other helps in the
software stack to correlate debug and performance data by tagging it with the
64-bit UID. The framework also provides the ability to propagate this UID all
the way to the driver layers for the target device so data from lower layers and
hardware can be correlated easily.

The XPTI concepts in use here are:

1.  Tracepoints - define all the points in a software layer we want to
instrument or trace. The trace point is used to generate the UID.
2.  Notification - allows the software layer to communicate the trace
information to listeners/subscribers
3.  Callback - implemented by subscribers to specific events to capture the
trace information

The SYCL runtime layer defines the tracepoints and notifies the information
about any given tracepoint to a registered subscriber. These tracepoints are
enabled in meaningful locations of the runtime to provide semantic information
about the developer's use of the language. This would include information such
as relationships that form asynchronous task graphs or other constructs such
as barriers that are introduced while waiting on events.

## Instrumentation Trace Points

This section will document all the places in the SYCL runtime that have been
instrumented to capture the asynchronous task graphs created by the runtime.
The task graphs are captured as graph, nodes and edges:

>  - The graph encapsulates all of the disjoint task graphs generated by the application.
>  - The nodes capture operations that are performed, such as kernel
executions or memory transfers
>  - The edges represent dependence relationships, the representation of
which mimics control flow as opposed to a dependence graph. The source node
in an edge must complete before the target node can begin execution.

 All code changes to enable this have been guarded by
 `XPTI_ENABLE_INSTRUMENTATION` macro and the CMake files have been updated to
 have this as an option which is enabled by default and this change is under
 `llvm/sycl/CMakeLists.txt`.

```cmake
...
# Create a soft option for enabling or disabling the instrumentation
# of the SYCL runtime
option(SYCL_ENABLE_XPTI_TRACING "Enable tracing of SYCL constructs" ON)
```

### The Graph

Any SYCL application can submit command groups to any active queue
during the lifetime of the application. Each submission is handled by the
runtime and the asynchronous task graphs are updated to reflect the new
submission. This may be as simple as adding a new node to the task-graph or
adding multiple nodes to the graph, where one of the nodes represents the
computation and the others dependent memory transfers.

To model this, we create a global graph for every application instantiation
and all kernel executions in the applications are added as nodes in this
global graph. In the SYCL runtime, there is no obvious location where the
creation of the global graph can be inserted as many objects are
instantiated statically. Currently, we embed the graph creation in the
plugin interface (PI) layer `initialize()` call. In this call, we will
perform two operations:

1. Initialize all listeners and create a trace event to represent the graph.
This is done in `sycl/include/CL/sycl/detail/pi.cpp`.
2. Send a `graph_create` event to all subscribers. This notification
will only be sent once.

### The Nodes

The command group lambdas are captured and encapsulated in a `Command`
object. This object is evaluated for dependencies on data/memory or external
OpenCL events and an asynchronous task graph is built by mapping all these
dependencies, before it is enqueued on the device. In order to capture the
command groups (nodes) and the dependencies (edges), the base class
`Command` and any derived classes that are of interest are instrumented.

In this section, we discuss the instrumentation of the Command object in two
parts: (1) The changes made to capture end-user source code details for
language constructs (2) The instrumentation that handles capturing the
relevant metadata.

1. In order to capture end-user source code information, we have implemented
`cl::sycl::detail::code_location` class that uses the builtin functions
in the compiler. However, equivalent implementations are unavailable on
Windows and separate cross-platform implementation might be used in the
future. To mitigate this, the Windows implementation will always report
`unknown_file`, `unknown_func` and a line number of 0 for source
file, function name and line number. We handle this case while processing
this information.

   The source information of a language construct, such as source file,
   function name, line number and column number allow us to determine if a
   Command that was previously created for a construct is being created
   again. In such cases, we will not emit a `node_create` event, but we
   will bump up the instance count recording the number of instances
   created. Secondly, the source information allows us to associate a unique
   ID with the source location and propagate it all the way to the driver,
   if possible. This will allow us to associate a Kernel event with a source
   location at all times. All instrumentation that identifies a command
   object of a given type and emits the `node_create` event is located
   in the `emitInstrumentationData()` and must be implemented by all
   derived classes.

   To enable this source location information, we start with enabling the
   public methods in the queue class, such as `queue.submit()`,
   `queue.parallel_for()`, `queue.wait()`, etc to include a default
   argument that captures the source location information. The location of
   the line in the caller that makes the call to `queue.submit()`,
   `queue.parallel_for()`, etc is represented in this default argument.
   These changes are present in `queue.hpp` and `ordered_queue.hpp`.
   The default arguments for all public functions are guarded by
   `#ifdef SYCL_INSTRUMENTATION_METADATA` that is currently enabled by
   default.

   The location information, when captured, is propagated all the way to the
   `CommandGroup` object. So, for every `CommandGroup` object, we
   will have the corresponding source location in end-user code where the
   command group is submitted to the queue. This metadata is propagated by
   the instrumentation to the subscribers of the stream.

2. The base `Command class` and all derived classes are instrumented to capture
   the relevant information for each command object and a `node_create` event is
   generated.

### The Node instance

Once a command object is created, it is enqueued on the device for
execution. To capture the execution of this node instance, we instrument the
`enqueue()` method to determine the cost of this computation or memory
related kernel. As the commands are enqueued, the enqueue method emits a
pair of events indicating the `task_begin` and `task_end`events that
capture the duration of the enqueued command.  For commands that are
asynchronous, the pair of events capture just the kernel submission and the
actual execution of the command on the device is tracked through the
`cl_event` returned by the enqueue operation. In the case of host kernel
execution or commands that are synchronous, the cost is measured directly.

In the case of the command being submitted to an OpenCL device, we capture
the event of the submitted kernel and propagate it to the subscriber tool.
It is up to the tool to register a callback for this event completion and
close the task opened for the command object.

### The Edges

As discussed in the previous section, the command groups submitted to the
device queues form nodes in the asynchronous tasks graphs created by
the SYCL runtime. In addition to these nodes, based on the memory references
(through accessors or USM pointers), additional nodes to `allocate`,
`copy` and `release` are created and they are necessary for the
computation kernels to run. The computation kernel has dependencies on the
memory objects and these dependencies are recorded as `event`s and in
our model we represent them as edges between the dependent nodes.

Tools monitoring the event stream then can start capturing the asynchronous
task graph as it is being built. As dependencies are added to a command
object, the instrumentation emits these dependencies as `edge_create`
events. Each of these `edge_create`events encapsulate the two command
objects that have a dependency through this edge. The source object of this
edge event must complete execution first before the target object of the
edge can begin execution.

To instrument this part of the code, the `Command::addDep` methods of
the Command object are instrumented to create the trace points and notify
all subscribers.

The `Release` command, as implemented in the SYCL runtime, has a
reference to the memory object, but no explicit dependencies are created. To
model the edges correctly, we instrument the `waitForRecordToFinish` method in
the `Scheduler` where the release operation waits on all the
dependent operations to complete to capture the edges.

This concludes all the changes that were made to the SYCL runtime to support
tracing. The next section talks about the XPTI framework that allows
applications and runtimes to efficiently capture, record and emit trace
notifications for important events during the run.

## Documentation of SYCL tracepoints
### XPTI Stream Domain

Traces belong to a named stream and this constitutes a domain of data. The XPTI
framework allows the instrumentation logic to define a stream and associate the
traces to the stream. A stream also defines the protocol to be observed to
decipher the data at the receiving end. The XPTI API defines the notion of a
trace point that includes an event, a trace point type and a notification.

- The **event** consists a payload that describes the event (`source file`,
  `function name`, `line number` and/or a `code pointer`), a `unique_id` that
  is used to identify the event, a `global user data field` and a mechanism to
  record `metadata` associated with the event. The `unique_id` is generated
  from the payload, so if the trace point is visited multiple times, it
  represents the same `unique_id` and this allows us to determine the number of
  instances of a trace point.

- The **trace point type** defines the type of notification that is being
  emitted for the trace point. There are many commonly occurring trace point
  types that are predefined by the framework, but a stream can extend this
  set by the extension APIs provided. A subscriber must explicitly register a
  callback for each trace point type that is of interest to the subscriber. If
  no subscribers are registered for a stream or a trace point type, then
  traces will not be emitted. A given trace point event may be used to emit
  multiple traces to different trace point types.

- The **notification** emits the trace to all subscribers of the stream domain
  that have a callback registered to the given trace point type. The stream
  can attached a per-instance user data during this notification call that
  *must* be guaranteed to be valid for the duration of the notification call.

This document will outline the protocol for the streams of data being generated
by the SYCL runtime.

## SYCL Stream `"sycl.pi"` Notification Signatures

| Trace Point Type | Parameter Description | Metadata |
| :--------------: | :-------------------- | :------- |
| `function_begin` | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::function_begin` that marks the beginning of a function</li> <li> **parent**: Event ID created for all functions in the `sycl.pi` layer.</li> <li> **event**: `nullptr` - since the stream of data just captures functions being called.</li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID to allow the correlation of the `function_begin` event with the `function_end` event. </li> <li> **user_data**: Name of the function being called sent in as `const char *` </li></div>                                                                                                                 | None     |
| `function_end`   | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::function_end` that marks the beginning of a function</li> <li> **parent**: Event ID created for all functions in the `sycl.pi` layer.</li> <li> **event**: `nullptr` - since the stream of data just captures functions being called.</li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID to allow the correlation of the `function_begin` event with the `function_end` event. This value is guaranteed to be the same value  received by the trace event for the corresponding `function_begin` </li> <li> **user_data**: Name of the function being called sent in as `const char *` </li></div> | None     |

## SYCL Stream `"sycl.pi.debug"` Notification Signatures

| Trace Point Type           | Parameter Description | Metadata |
| :------------------------: | :-------------------- | :------- |
| `function_with_args_begin` | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::function_with_args_begin` that marks the beginning of a function</li> <li> **parent**: Event ID created for all functions in the `sycl.pi.debug` layer.</li> <li> **event**: `nullptr` - since the stream of data just captures functions being called.</li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID to allow the correlation of the `function_with_args_begin` event with the `function_with_args_end` event. </li> <li> **user_data**: A pointer to `function_with_args_t` object, that includes function ID, name, and arguments. </li></div>                                                                                                                 | None     |
| `function_with_args_end`   | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::function_with_args_end` that marks the beginning of a function</li> <li> **parent**: Event ID created for all functions in the `sycl.pi.debug` layer.</li> <li> **event**: `nullptr` - since the stream of data just captures functions being called.</li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID to allow the correlation of the `function_with_args_begin` event with the `function_with_args_end` event. This value is guaranteed to be the same value  received by the trace event for the corresponding `function_with_args_begin` </li> <li> **user_data**: A pointer to `function_with_args_t` object, that includes function ID, name, arguments, and return value. </li></div> | None     |

## SYCL Stream `"sycl"` Notification Signatures

All trace point types in bold provide semantic information about the graph, nodes and edges and the toplogy of the asynchronous task graphs created by the runtime.
| Trace Point Type | Parameter Description | Metadata |
| :--------------: | :-------------------- | :------- |
| **`graph_create`** | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::graph_create` that marks the creation of an asynchronous graph.</li> <li> **parent**: `nullptr`</li> <li> **event**: The global asynchronous graph object ID. All other graph related events such as node and edge creation will always this ID as the parent ID. </li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID related to the event, but not a correlation ID as there are other events to correlate to. </li> <li> **user_data**: `nullptr`</li> <p></p> SYCL runtime will always have one instance of a graph object with many disjoint subgraphs that get created during the execution of an application. </div>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | None                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| **`node_create`**  | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::node_create` that marks the creation of a node in the graph, which could be a computational kernel or memory operation.</li> <li> **parent**: The global graph event that is created during the `graph_create` event.</li> <li> **event**: The unique ID that identifies the data parallel compute operation or memory operation. </li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID related to the event, but not a correlation ID as there are other events to correlate to. </li> <li> **user_data**: Command type that has been submitted through the command group handler, which could be one of: `command_group_node`, `memory_transfer_node`, `memory_allocation_node`, `sub_buffer_creation_node`, `memory_deallocation_node`, `host_acc_create_buffer_lock_node`, `host_acc_destroy_buffer_release_node` combined with the address of the command group object and represented as a string [`const char *`] </li> <p></p> SYCL runtime will always have one instance of a graph object with many disjoint subgraphs that get created during the execution of an application.</div> | <li> Computational Kernels </li> `sycl_device`, `sycl_device_type`, `sycl_device_name`, `kernel_name`, `from_source`, `sym_function_name`, `sym_source_file_name`, `sym_line_no` <li>Memory operations</li> `memory_object`, `offset`, `access_range`, `allocation_type`, `copy_from`, `copy_to` |
| **`edge_create`**  | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::graph_create` that marks the creation of an asynchronous graph.</li> <li> **parent**: The global graph event that is created during the `graph_create` event.</li> <li> **event**: The unique ID that identifies the dependence relationship between two operations. </li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID related to the event, but not a correlation ID as there are other events to correlate to. </li> <li> **user_data**: `nullptr`</li> <p></p> Edges capture dependence relationships between computations or computations and memory operations.</div>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | `access_mode`, `memory_object`, `event`                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| `task_begin`       | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::task_begin` that marks the beginning of a task belonging to one of the nodes in the graph. When the trace event is for a kernel executing on a device other than the the CPU, this `task_begin` and corresponding `task_end` mark the submit call. To track the execution of the kernel on the device, the `trace_signal` event must be monitored to get the kernel event handle from which the execution statistics can be gathered. </li> <li> **parent**: The global graph event that is created during the `graph_create` event.</li> <li> **event**: The event ID will reflect the ID of the computation or memory operation kernel, which would be one of the nodes in the graph.</li> <li> **instance**: Instance ID for the task that can be used to correlate it with the corresponding `task_end` trace event. </li> <li> **user_data**: `nullptr` </li> <p></p></div>                                                                                                                                                                                             | Same metadata defined for the node the trace task belongs to.                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| `task_end`         | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::task_end` that marks the end of a task belonging to one of the nodes in the graph. The specific task instance can be tacked through the instance ID parameter which helps correlate the `task_end` with the corresponding `task_begin`. </li> <li> **parent**: The global graph event that is created during the `graph_create` event.</li> <li> **event**: The event ID will reflect the ID of the computation or memory operation kernel, which would be one of the nodes in the graph.</li> <li> **instance**: Instance ID for the task that can be used to correlate it with the corresponding `task_begin` trace event. </li> <li> **user_data**: `nullptr` </li> <p></p></div>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Same metadata defined for the node the trace task belongs to.                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| `signal`           | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::signal` that marks the an event that contains the `event` handle of an executing kernel on a device. </li> <li> **parent**: The global graph event that is created during the `graph_create` event.</li> <li> **event**: The event ID will reflect the ID of the computation or memory operation kernel, which would be one of the nodes in the graph.</li> <li> **instance**: Instance ID for the task for which the signal has been generated. </li> <li> **user_data**: Address of the kernel event that is returned by the device so the progress of the execution can be tracked. </li> <p></p></div>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Same metadata defined for the node the trace task belongs to.                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| `wait_begin`       | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::wait_begin` that marks the beginning of the wait on an `event`</li> <li> **parent**: `nullptr`</li> <li> **event**: The event ID will reflect the ID of the command group object submission that created this event or the graph event, if the event is an external event. </li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID to allow the correlation of the `wait_begin` event with the `wait_end` event. </li> <li> **user_data**: String indicating `event.wait` and the address of the event sent in as `const char *` </li> <p></p>Tracing the `event.wait()` or `event.wait_and_throw()` will capture the waiting on the action represented by the event object, which could be the execution of a kernel, completion of a memory operation, etc.</div>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | None                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| `wait_end`         | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::wait_end` that marks the beginning of the wait on an `event`</li> <li> **parent**: `nullptr`</li> <li> **event**: The event ID will reflect the ID of the command group object submission that created this event or the graph event, if the event is an external event. </li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID to allow the correlation of the `wait_begin` event with the `wait_end` event. </li> <li> **user_data**: String indicating `event.wait` and the address of the event sent in as `const char *` </li></div>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | None                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| `wait_begin`       | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::wait_begin` that marks the beginning of the wait on an `event`</li> <li> **parent**: `nullptr`</li> <li> **event**: The event ID will reflect the ID of the command group object submission that created this event or a new event based on the combination of the string "queue.wait" and the address of the event.  </li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID to allow the correlation of the `wait_begin` event with the `wait_end` event. </li> <li> **user_data**: String indicating `queue.wait` and the address of the event sent in as `const char *` </li> <p></p>Tracing the `queue.wait()` or `queue.wait_and_throw()` will capture the waiting on the action represented by the event object, which could be the execution of a kernel, completion of a memory operation, etc that is embedded in the command group handler. All wait events contain metadata that indicates the SYCL device on which the corresponding operation has been submitted. If the event is from a command group handler, then the source location information is available as well.</div>    | `sycl_device`, `sycl_device_type`, `sycl_device_name`, `sym_function_name`, `sym_source_file_name`, `sym_line_no`, `sym_column_no`                                                                                                                                                                            |
| `wait_end`         | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::wait_end` that marks the beginning of the wait on an `event`</li> <li> **parent**: `nullptr`</li> <li> **event**: The event ID will reflect the ID of the command group object submission that created this event or a new event based on the combination of the string "queue.wait" and the address of the event. </li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID to allow the correlation of the `wait_begin` event with the `wait_end` event. </li> <li> **user_data**: String indicating `queue.wait` and the address of the event  as `const char *` </li></div>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | `sycl_device`, `sycl_device_type`, `sycl_device_name`, `sym_function_name`, `sym_source_file_name`, `sym_line_no`, `sym_column_no`                                                                                                                                                                            |
| `barrier_begin`       | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::barrier_begin` that marks the beginning of a barrier while enqueuing a command group object</li> <li> **parent**: The global graph event that is created during the `graph_create` event.</li> <li> **event**: The event ID will reflect the ID of the command group object that has encountered a barrier during the enqueue operation.  </li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID to allow the correlation of the `barrier_begin` event with the `barrier_end` event. </li> <li> **user_data**: String indicating `enqueue.barrier` and the reason for the barrier as a `const char *` </li> <p></p>The reason for the barrier could be one of `Buffer locked by host accessor`, `Blocked by host task` or `Unknown reason`.</div>   | <li> Computational Kernels </li> `sycl_device`, `sycl_device_type`, `sycl_device_name`, `kernel_name`, `from_source`, `sym_function_name`, `sym_source_file_name`, `sym_line_no`, `sym_column_no` <li>Memory operations</li> `memory_object`, `offset`, `access_range_start`, `access_range_end`, `allocation_type`, `copy_from`, `copy_to` |
| `barrier_end`         | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::barrier_end` that marks the end of the barrier that is encountered during enqueue.</li> <li> **parent**: The global graph event that is created during the `graph_create` event.</li> <li> **event**: The event ID will reflect the ID of the command group object that has encountered a barrier during the enqueue operation. </li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID to allow the correlation of the `barrier_begin` event with the `barrier_end` event. </li> <li> **user_data**: String indicating `enqueue.barrier` and the reason for the barrier as a `const char *` </li> <p></p>The reason for the barrier could be one of `Buffer locked by host accessor`, `Blocked by host task` or `Unknown reason`.</div>   | <li> Computational Kernels </li> `sycl_device`, `sycl_device_type`, `sycl_device_name`, `kernel_name`, `from_source`, `sym_function_name`, `sym_source_file_name`, `sym_line_no`, `sym_column_no` <li>Memory operations</li> `memory_object`, `offset`, `access_range_start`, `access_range_end`, `allocation_type`, `copy_from`, `copy_to` |

### Metadata description

| Metadata | Type | Description |
| :------: | :--: | :---------- |
| `access_mode` | `int` | Value of `sycl::access::mode` enum |
| `access_range_start` | `size_t` | Start of accessor range |
| `access_range_end` | `size_t` | End of accessor range |
| `allocation_type` | C-style string | Allocation type |
| `copy_from` | `size_t` | ID of source device |
| `copy_to` | `size_t` | ID of target device |
| `event` | `size_t` | Unique identifier of event |
| `from_source` | `bool` | `true` if kernel comes from user source |
| `kernel_name` | C-style string | Kernel name |
| `memory_object` | `size_t` | Unique identifier of memory object |
| `offset` | `size_t` | Accessor offset size in bytes |
| `sycl_device` | `size_t` | Unique identifier of SYCL device |
| `sycl_device_type` | C-style string | `CPU`, `GPU`, `ACC`, or `HOST` |
| `sycl_device_name` | C-style string | Result of `sycl::device::get_info<sycl::info::name>()` |
| `sym_function_name` | C-style string | Function name |
| `sym_source_file_name` | C-style string | Source file name |
| `sym_line_no` | `int32_t` | File line number |
| `sym_column_no` | `int32_t` | File column number |


## Buffer management stream `"sycl.experimental.buffer"` Notification Signatures

| Trace Point Type           | Parameter Description | Metadata |
| :------------------------: | :-------------------- | :------- |
| `offload_alloc_construct` | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::offload_buffer_data_t` that marks offload buffer creation point</li> <li> **parent**: Event ID created for all functions in the `oneapi.experimental.buffer` layer.</li> <li> **event**: `nullptr` - since the stream of data just captures functions being called.</li> <li> **instance**: `nullptr` since no begin-end event alignment is needed. </li> <li> **user_data**: A pointer to `offload_buffer_data_t` object, that includes buffer object ID, host pointer used to create/initialize buffer, buffer element information (type name, size), number of buffer dimensions and buffer size for each dimension. </li></div> | None     |
| `offload_alloc_associate`   | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::offload_buffer_association_data_t` that provides association between user level buffer object and platform specific memory object</li> <li> **parent**: Event ID created for all functions in the `oneapi.experimental.buffer` layer.</li> <li> **event**: `nullptr` - since the stream of data just captures functions being called.</li> <li> **instance**: `nullptr` since no begin-end event alignment is needed.</li> <li> **user_data**: A pointer to `offload_buffer_association_data_t` object, that includes user object ID and platform-specific representation for offload buffer. </li></div> | None     |
| `offload_alloc_destruct` | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::offload_buffer_data_t` that marks offload buffer destruction point</li> <li> **parent**: Event ID created for all functions in the `oneapi.experimental.buffer` layer.</li> <li> **event**: `nullptr` - since the stream of data just captures functions being called.</li> <li> **instance**: `nullptr` since no begin-end event alignment is needed. </li> <li> **user_data**: A pointer to `offload_buffer_data_t` object, that includes buffer object ID. </li></div> | None     |
| `offload_alloc_release`   | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::offload_buffer_release_data_t` that provides information about release of platform specific memory object</li> <li> **parent**: `nullptr` - since the stream of data just captures functions being called.</li> <li> **event**: `nullptr` - since the stream of data just captures functions being called.</li> <li> **instance**: `nullptr` since no begin-end event alignment is needed.</li> <li> **user_data**: A pointer to `offload_buffer_association_data_t` object, that includes user object ID and platform-specific representation for offload buffer. </li></div> | None     |
| `offload_alloc_accessor` | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::offload_accessor_data_t` that marks offload accessor creation point</li> <li> **parent**: Event ID created for all functions in the `oneapi.experimental.buffer` layer.</li> <li> **event**: `nullptr` - since the stream of data just captures functions being called.</li> <li> **instance**: `nullptr` since no begin-end event alignment is needed. </li> <li> **user_data**: A pointer to `offload_accessor_data_t` object, that includes buffer object ID, accessor handle created from specific buffer, accessor information (access target and mode). </li></div> | None     |

## SYCL Memory Allocations Stream `"sycl.experimental.mem_alloc"` Notification Signatures

| Trace Point Type           | Parameter Description | Metadata |
| :------------------------: | :-------------------- | :------- |
| `mem_alloc_begin` | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::mem_alloc_begin` that marks the beginning of memory allocation process</li> <li> **parent**: Event ID created for all functions in the `oneapi.level_zero.experimental.mem_alloc` layer.</li> <li> **event**: `nullptr` - since the stream of data just captures functions being called.</li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID to allow the correlation of the `mem_alloc_begin` event with the `mem_alloc_end` event. </li> <li> **user_data**: A pointer to `mem_alloc_data_t` object, that includes memory object ID (if any), allocation size, and guard zone size (if any). </li></div> | None     |
| `mem_alloc_end`   | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::mem_alloc_end` that marks the end of memory allocation process</li> <li> **parent**: Event ID created for all functions in the `oneapi.level_zero.experimental.mem_alloc` layer.</li> <li> **event**: `nullptr` - since the stream of data just captures functions being called.</li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID to allow the correlation of the `mem_alloc_begin` event with the `mem_alloc_end` event. This value is guaranteed to be the same value  received by the trace event for the corresponding `mem_alloc_begin`.</li> <li> **user_data**: A pointer to `mem_alloc_data_t` object, that includes memory object ID (if any), allocated pointer, allocation size, and guard zone size (if any). </li></div> | None     |
| `mem_release_begin` | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::mem_release_begin` that marks the beginning of memory allocation process</li> <li> **parent**: Event ID created for all functions in the `oneapi.level_zero.experimental.mem_alloc` layer.</li> <li> **event**: `nullptr` - since the stream of data just captures functions being called.</li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID to allow the correlation of the `mem_release_begin` event with the `mem_release_end` event. </li> <li> **user_data**: A pointer to `mem_alloc_data_t` object, that includes memory object ID (if any) and released pointer. </li></div> | None     |
| `mem_release_end`   | <div style="text-align: left"><li>**trace_type**: `xpti::trace_point_type_t::mem_release_end` that marks the end of memory allocation process</li> <li> **parent**: Event ID created for all functions in the `oneapi.level_zero.experimental.mem_alloc` layer.</li> <li> **event**: `nullptr` - since the stream of data just captures functions being called.</li> <li> **instance**: Unique ID to allow the correlation of the `mem_release_begin` event with the `mem_release_end` event. This value is guaranteed to be the same value  received by the trace event for the corresponding `mem_release_begin`.</li> <li> **user_data**: A pointer to `mem_alloc_data_t` object, that includes memory object ID (if any) and released pointer. </li></div> | None     |
