Discourse topic details

- Category: [Runtimes](https://discourse.llvm.org/c/runtimes/64)
- Title: "RFC: SYCL runtime upstreaming"
- Tags: sycl

## Overview

SYCL runtime provides an implementation of the SYCL 2020 API specification. It's
responsible for managing resources for enqueuing tasks to the offload device,
tracking dependencies between them, and data movement between the host and
devices. The SYCL runtime is device-agnostic and uses Unified Runtime
(https://github.com/oneapi-src/unified-runtime) as an external dependency. This
Unified Runtime serves as an interface layer between the SYCL runtime and
device-specific backends. Unified Runtime has several adapters that bind to
various backends in a similar fashion to libomptarget.

This RFC contains a brief overview of the core functionality of the SYCL runtime
and its major components. The main RFC for SYCL implementation upstreaming can
be found here:
https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-add-full-support-for-the-sycl-programming-model/74080

## Host and device code integration

Consider this SYCL code:

```
#include <sycl/sycl.hpp>
int main() {
  sycl::queue q;
  sycl::range<3> range{8, 8, 8};
  sycl::buffer<double, 3> b{range};
  int i = 12;
  q.submit([&](sycl::handler &cgh) {
    sycl::accessor acc{b, cgh};
    cgh.parallel_for(range, [=](sycl::id<3> idx) {
      acc[idx] += i;
    });
  });
}
```

The lambda passed to the `sycl::handler::parallel_for` function represents a
device kernel. When a SYCL application is started or a dynamic SYCL library is
loaded, all device images contained in the multi-targeted binary are registered
in the program manager, which is one of the larger components of the SYCL
runtime, using SYCL's `__tgt_register_lib`
(https://clang.llvm.org/docs/OffloadingDesign.html#global-constructor-and-destructor)
counterpart, `__sycl_register_lib`. The device image wrappers generated by SYCL
compilation tools also include information like device kernel symbols and
build options. The integration header, which is generated during device compilation and
included during host compilation (see
https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-sycl-host-compiler-integration-header-and-footer/74081),
helps the runtime map SYCL kernel invocations to their corresponding symbols in
the device code. The program manager then uses information from device image
wrappers to map the kernel name to a set of device images, chooses an image
compatible with the requested device, passes it to the backend to be
just-in-time compiled if needed, and caches the result for reuse.

The integration header also provides information about kernel arguments.
It assumes that the lambda layout is the same for both device and host
compilation, and the runtime uses the information about argument size
and offsets to extract their values from the lambda object passed to
`sycl::handler::parallel_for` and sets them when enqueuing the kernel. The
integration header also includes information about argument types, which
is needed to handle special cases like `sycl::accessor` objects.

For more details about device code compilation, see
https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-sycl-kernel-lowering/74082
https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-offloading-design-for-sycl-offload-kind-and-spir-targets/74088

## Scheduler

Another large component in SYCL runtime is the scheduler. The scheduler
maintains a directed acyclic graph representation of the submitted command
groups, managing dependencies and data movement required by the application code
explicitly or with the use of accessors (for more details, see
https://registry.khronos.org/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#sec:command-groups-exec-order).
Most of the actual synchronization between tasks is handled by the underlying
device backend, with the scheduler simply enqueuing tasks as they are submitted
and passing a list of dependencies. There are some exceptions to this. A SYCL
application may require access to some data on the host or may need to submit an
asynchronous host task. Such cases are handled by the scheduler directly by
delaying the submission of device tasks until their host dependencies are
satisfied.



## Device headers and libraries

SYCL runtime headers provide declarations of various algorithms and
built-in functions to be used in device code. A large portion of such
algorithms and built-in functions are simple enough to be implemented in
the headers (for example, those directly lowered into SPIR-V built-ins),
but some have more complex implementations (for example, fallback
implementations for functionality that might not be supported natively).
The more complex implementations are available in the form of several
pre-built device libraries that are linked with the user device code
either during ahead-of-time compilation or at runtime by the program
manager, using the information about device library dependencies
embedded in device image wrappers by SYCL compilation tools.
