sycl/doc/extensions/README.md, before:

# Extensions

The directory contains documents that describe DPC++ extensions to SYCL
specification.

DPC++ extensions status:

|  Extension  |    Status   |   Comment   |
|-------------|:------------|:------------|
| [SPV_INTEL_function_pointers](SPIRV/SPV_INTEL_function_pointers.asciidoc)                                                   | Supported(OpenCL: CPU, GPU; HOST)         | |
| [SPV_INTEL_inline_assembly](SPIRV/SPV_INTEL_inline_assembly.asciidoc)                                                       | Supported(OpenCL: GPU)                    | |

Legend:

|  Keyword    |   Meaning   |
|-------------|:------------|
|  Proposal                        | A document describing an extension is published, but the extension is not supported yet |
|  Supported                       | An extension is supported |
|  Partially supported             | An extension is partially supported, see comments column for more info |
|  Deprecated                      | An extension is deprecated and can be removed in future versions |
|  (API: DeviceType1, DeviceType2) | An extension is supported when specific combination of API and device types are used. If device type or API are not mentioned then an extension is supported on any device type or API. API can be OpenCL, CUDA, HOST. DeviceType can be CPU, GPU, ACCELERATOR |


See [User Manual](../UsersManual.md) to find information how to enable extensions.

Commit message:

[SYCL][DOC] Introductory material for extensions
Add an overview README for the extensions directory, a description of
the process for maintaining an extension document over its lifetime,
and a template for creating new extension documents.

sycl/doc/extensions/README.md, after:

# SYCL Extensions in DPC++

DPC++ is an implementation of the [SYCL language][1].  In addition to the core
SYCL features, DPC++ also implements certain extensions, and this directory
contains the specifications for those extensions.  These extensions are
organized into subdirectories according to their state.

[1]: <https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html>

| Directory        | Description                                                   |
|------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
|[supported][2]    | Extensions which are fully supported                          |
|[experimental][3] | Extensions which are implemented but may change in the future |
|[deprecated][4]   | Extensions which are supported but will be removed soon       |
|[proposed][5]     | Extensions which proposed but not yet implemented             |
|[removed][6]      | Extensions which used to be supported but are now removed     |

[2]: <supported>
[3]: <experimental>
[4]: <deprecated>
[5]: <proposed>
[6]: <removed>
