===========================
Libc++ 24.0.0 Release Notes
===========================

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Written by the `Libc++ Team <https://libcxx.llvm.org>`_

.. warning::

   These are in-progress notes for the upcoming libc++ 24.0.0 release.
   Release notes for previous releases can be found on
   `the Download Page <https://releases.llvm.org/download.html>`_.

Introduction
============

This document contains the release notes for the libc++ C++ Standard Library,
part of the LLVM Compiler Infrastructure, release 24.0.0. Here we describe the
status of libc++ in some detail, including major improvements from the previous
release and new feature work. For the general LLVM release notes, see `the LLVM
documentation <https://llvm.org/docs/ReleaseNotes.html>`_. All LLVM releases may
be downloaded from the `LLVM releases web site <https://llvm.org/releases/>`_.

For more information about libc++, please see the `Libc++ Web Site
<https://libcxx.llvm.org>`_ or the `LLVM Web Site <https://llvm.org>`_.

Note that if you are reading this file from a Git checkout or the
main Libc++ web page, this document applies to the *next* release, not
the current one. To see the release notes for a specific release, please
see the `releases page <https://llvm.org/releases/>`_.

What's New in Libc++ 24.0.0?
==============================

Implemented Papers
------------------

- P0493R5: Atomic minimum/maximum (`Github <https://llvm.org/PR105418>`__)

Improvements and New Features
-----------------------------


Deprecations and Removals
-------------------------

- The ``std::launch::any`` enumerator that was accidentally provided as an extension is now deprecated.
  It will be removed in LLVM 25.

Potentially breaking changes
----------------------------

- TODO: In LLVM 23, libc++ dropped a lot of transitive includes in all language modes. This improves compile time significantly,
  but causes programs which rely on these includes to not compile anymore. The ``_LIBCPP_KEEP_TRANSITIVE_INCLUDES_LLVM23``
  macro that was provided in LLVM 23 to ease the transition has been removed in this release.

Announcements About Future Releases
-----------------------------------


ABI Affecting Changes
---------------------

- TODO: ``std::allocator`` is trivially default constructible since LLVM 22. In LLVM 23, the ``_LIBCPP_DEPRECATED_ABI_NON_TRIVIAL_ALLOCATOR``
  macro was provided as an escape hatch, but it has been removed in LLVM 24 since there was no evidence of it being useful.

- TODO: ``bitset::operator[]`` returns ``bool`` since LLVM 22, fixing a conformance bug. In LLVM 23, the ``_LIBCPP_DEPRECATED_ABI_BITSET_CONST_SUBSCRIPT_RETURN_REF``
  macro was provided as an escape hatch, but it has been removed in LLVM 24 since there was no evidence of it being useful.

Build System Changes
--------------------

